 Chapter 8 Optimization for T raining Deep Mo dels Deep learning algorithms in v olv e optimization in man y con texts. F or example, p erforming inference in mo dels suc h as PCA in volv es solving an optimization problem. W e often use analytical optimization to write pro ofs or design algorithms. Of all the many optimization problems in v olv ed in deep learning, the most diﬃcult is neural netw ork training. It is quite common to inv est days to mon ths of time on h undreds of machines to solve even a single instance of the neural net w ork training problem. Because this problem is so imp ortan t and so expensive, a sp ecialized set of optimization techniques hav e b een developed for solving it. This c hapter presen ts these optimization techniques for neural net w ork training. If you are unfamiliar with the basic principles of gradien t-based optimization, w e suggest reviewing chapter 4 . That chapter includes a brief ov erview of numerical optimization in general. This chapter fo cuses on one particular case of optimization: ﬁnding the param- eters θ of a neural net w ork that signiﬁcantly reduce a cost function J ( θ ) , which t ypically includes a p erformance measure ev aluated on the entire training set as w ell as additional regularization terms. W e b egin with a description of how optimization used as a training algorithm for a machine learning task diﬀers from pure optimization. Next, we present sev eral of the concrete c hallenges that make optimization of neural netw orks diﬃcult. W e then deﬁne several practical algorithms, including b oth optimization algorithms themselv es and strategies for initializing the parameters. More adv anced algorithms adapt their learning rates during training or leverage information con tained in 271 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS the second deriv ativ es of the cost function. Finally , w e conclude with a review of sev eral optimization strategies that are formed b y combining simple optimization algorithms into higher-lev el pro cedures. 8.1 Ho w Learning Diﬀers from Pure Optimization Optimization algorithms used for training of deep mo dels diﬀer from traditional optimization algorithms in several w a ys. Mac hine learning usually acts indirectly . In most machine learning scenarios, w e care ab out some p erformance measure P , that is deﬁned with resp ect to the test set and may also be in tractable. W e therefore optimize P only indirectly . W e reduce a diﬀerent cost function J ( θ ) in the hop e that doing so will improv e P . This is in con trast to pure optimization, where minimizing J is a goal in and of itself. Optimization algorithms for training deep mo dels also typically include some sp ecialization on the sp eciﬁc structure of mac hine learning ob jectiv e functions. T ypically , the cost function can b e written as an av erage ov er the training set, suc h as J ( θ ) = E ( x , y ) ∼ ˆ p data L ( f ( x ; θ ) , y ) , (8.1) where L is the p er-example loss function, f ( x ; θ ) is the predicted output when the input is x , and ˆ p data is the empirical distribution. In the sup ervised learning case, y is the target output. Throughout this c hapter, we dev elop the unregularized sup ervised case, where the argumen ts to L are f ( x ; θ ) and y . It is trivial to extend this developmen t, for example, to include θ or x as arguments, or to exclude y as argumen ts, to dev elop v arious forms of regularization or unsup ervised learning. Equation 8.1 deﬁnes an ob jectiv e function with resp ect to the training set. W e w ould usually prefer to minimize the corresp onding ob jective function where the exp ectation is taken across the data-gener ating distribution p data rather than just o v er the ﬁnite training set: J ∗ ( θ ) = E ( x , y ) ∼ p data L ( f ( x ; θ ) , y ) . (8.2) 8.1.1 Empirical Risk Minimization The goal of a machine learning algorithm is to reduce the exp ected generalization error given by equation 8.2 . This quan tit y is known as the risk . W e emphasize here that the exp ectation is tak en ov er the true underlying distribution p data . If w e knew the true distribution p data ( x , y ) , risk minimization w ould b e an optimization 272 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS task solv able by an optimization algorithm. When we do not know p data ( x , y ) but only hav e a training set of samples, ho w ev er, we hav e a mac hine learning problem. The simplest wa y to con v ert a machine learning problem back into an op- timization problem is to minimize the exp ected loss on the training set. This means replacing the true distribution p ( x , y ) with the empirical distribution ˆ p ( x , y ) deﬁned by the training set. W e now minimize the empirical risk E x , y ∼ ˆ p data ( x ,y ) [ L ( f ( x ; θ ) , y )] = 1 m m  i =1 L ( f ( x ( i ) ; θ ) , y ( i ) ) , (8.3) where m is the n um b er of training examples. The training pro cess based on minimizing this av erage training error is kno wn as empirical risk minimization . In this setting, machine learning is still very similar to straigh tforw ard optimization. Rather than optimizing the risk directly , w e optimize the empirical risk and hop e that the risk decreases signiﬁcantly as w ell. A v ariet y of theoretical results establish conditions under whic h the true risk can b e exp ected to decrease by v arious amounts. Nonetheless, empirical risk minimization is prone to ov erﬁtting. Models with high capacity can simply memorize the training set. In many cases, empirical risk minimization is not really feasible. The most eﬀective mo dern optimization algorithms are based on gradien t descent, but many useful loss functions, such as 0-1 loss, ha v e no useful deriv ativ es (the deriv ative is either zero or undeﬁned ev erywhere). These t wo problems mean that, in the context of deep learning, we rarely use empirical risk minimization. Instead, we m ust use a sligh tly diﬀerent approac h, in which the quantit y that w e actually optimize is even more diﬀerent from the quan tit y that w e truly w an t to optimize. 8.1.2 Surrogate Loss F unctions and Early Stopping Sometimes, the loss function w e actually care ab out (sa y , classiﬁcation error) is not one that can b e optimized eﬃciently . F or example, exactly minimizing exp ected 0-1 loss is typically in tractable (exp onential in the input dimension), even for a linear classiﬁer ( Marcotte and Sav ard , 1992 ). In suc h situations, one typically optimizes a surrogate loss function instead, whic h acts as a proxy but has adv antages. F or example, the negative log-lik eliho o d of the correct class is typically used as a surrogate for the 0-1 loss. The negative log-likelihoo d allows the mo del to estimate the conditional probability of the classes, given the input, and if the mo del can do that w ell, then it can pick the classes that yield the least classiﬁcation error in exp ectation. 273 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS In some cases, a surrogate loss function actually results in b eing able to learn more. F or example, the test set 0-1 loss often con tinues to decrease for a long time after the training set 0-1 loss has reached zero, when training using the log-lik eliho o d surrogate. This is b ecause ev en when the exp ected 0-1 loss is zero, one can improv e the robustness of the classiﬁer b y further pushing the classes apart from each other, obtaining a more conﬁdent and reliable classiﬁer, thus extracting more information from the training data than w ould hav e b een p ossible b y simply minimizing the a v erage 0-1 loss on the training set. A very imp ortan t diﬀerence b etw een optimization in general and optimization as we use it for training algorithms is that training algorithms do not usually halt at a lo cal minim um. Instead, a mac hine learning algorithm usually minimizes a surrogate loss function but halts when a conv ergence criterion based on early stopping (section 7.8 ) is satisﬁed. T ypically the early stopping criterion is based on the true underlying loss function, such as 0-1 loss measured on a v alidation set, and is designed to cause the algorithm to halt whenev er o v erﬁtting b egins to o ccur. T raining often halts while the surrogate loss function still has large deriv ative s, whic h is v ery diﬀerent from the pure optimization setting, where an optimization algorithm is considered to ha v e conv erged when the gradien t b ecomes very small. 8.1.3 Batc h and Minibatch Algorithms One aspect of machine learning algorithms that separates them from general optimization algorithms is that the ob jectiv e function usually decomp oses as a sum o v er the training examples. Optimization algorithms for mac hine learning t ypically compute each up date to the parameters based on an exp ected v alue of the cost function estimated using only a subset of the terms of the full cost function. F or example, maxim um likelihoo d estimation problems, when view ed in log space, decomp ose in to a sum ov er eac h example: θ ML = arg max θ m  i =1 log p model ( x ( i ) , y ( i ) ; θ ) . (8.4) Maximizing this sum is equiv alent to maximizing the exp ectation ov er the empirical distribution deﬁned by the training set: J ( θ ) = E x , y ∼ ˆ p data log p model ( x , y ; θ ) . (8.5) Most of the prop erties of the ob jectiv e function J used b y most of our opti- mization algorithms are also exp ectations ov er the training set. F or example, the 274 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS most commonly used prop erty is the gradient: ∇ θ J ( θ ) = E x , y ∼ ˆ p data ∇ θ log p model ( x , y ; θ ) . (8.6) Computing this exp ectation exactly is v ery expensive b ecause it requires ev aluating the mo del on ev ery example in the entire dataset. In practice, we can compute these exp ectations b y randomly sampling a small num b er of examples from the dataset, then taking the a v erage ov er only those examples. Recall that the standard error of the mean (equation 5.46 ) estimated from n samples is given by σ / √ n, where σ is the true standard deviation of the v alue of the samples. The denominator of √ n sho ws that there are less than linear returns to using more examples to estimate the gradient. Compare tw o h yp othetical estimates of the gradient, one based on 100 examples and another based on 10,000 examples. The latter requires 100 times more computation than the former but reduces the standard error of the mean only by a factor of 10. Most optimization algorithms conv erge muc h faster (in terms of total computation, not in terms of n um b er of up dates) if they are allow ed to rapidly compute approximate estimates of the gradien t rather than slowly computing the exact gradient. Another consideration motiv ating statistical estimation of the gradient from a small num b er of samples is redundancy in the training set. In the worst case, all m samples in the training set could b e identical copies of eac h other. A sampling- based estimate of the gradien t could compute the correct gradien t with a single sample, using m times less computation than the naive approac h. In practice, we are unlikely to encoun ter this worst-case situation, but we may ﬁnd large num b ers of examples that all mak e very similar contributions to the gradient. Optimization algorithms that use the en tire training set are called batc h or deterministic gradient metho ds, b ecause they pro cess all the training examples sim ultaneously in a large batc h. This terminology can b e somewhat confusing b ecause the w ord “batch” is also often used to describ e the minibatc h used b y minibatc h sto chastic gradient descen t. T ypically the term “batc h gradien t descent” implies the use of the full training set, while the use of the term “batch” to describ e a group of examples do es not. F or example, it is common to use the term “batch size” to describ e the size of a minibatch. Optimization algorithms that use only a single example at a time are sometimes called sto c hastic and sometimes online metho ds. The term “online” is usually reserv ed for when the examples are drawn from a stream of contin ually created examples rather than from a ﬁxed-size training set o v er which sev eral passes are made. Most algorithms used for deep learning fall somewhere in b etw een, using more 275 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS than one but few er than all the training examples. These were traditionally called minibatc h or minibatc h sto c hastic metho ds, and it is no w common to call them simply sto c hastic metho ds. The canonical example of a sto chastic metho d is sto chastic gradien t descent, presen ted in detail in section 8.3.1 . Minibatc h sizes are generally driv en by the following factors: • Larger batches provide a more accurate estimate of the gradient, but with less than linear returns. • Multicore architectures are usually underutilized by extremely small batches. This motiv ates using some absolute minim um batch size, b elo w which there is no reduction in the time to pro cess a minibatch. • If all examples in the batch are to b e pro cessed in parallel (as is typically the case), then the amoun t of memory scales with the batch size. F or man y hardw are setups this is the limiting factor in batc h size. • Some kinds of hardware ac hiev e b etter runtime with sp eciﬁc sizes of arra ys. Esp ecially when using GPUs, it is common for p o wer of 2 batch sizes to oﬀer b etter runtime. T ypical p ow er of 2 batch sizes range from 32 to 256, with 16 sometimes b eing attempted for large mo dels. • Small batc hes can oﬀer a regularizing eﬀect ( Wilson and Martinez , 2003 ), p erhaps due to the noise they add to the learning pro cess. Generalization error is often best for a batch size of 1. T raining with such a small batc h size might require a small learning rate to maintain stabilit y b ecause of the high v ariance in the estimate of the gradient. The total runtime can b e very high as a result of the need to make more steps, b oth b ecause of the reduced learning rate and b ecause it takes more steps to observe the entire training set. Diﬀeren t kinds of algorithms use diﬀerent kinds of information from the mini- batc h in v arious wa ys. Some algorithms are more sensitive to sampling error than others, either b ecause they use information that is diﬃcult to estimate accurately with few samples, or b ecause they use information in w a ys that amplify sampling errors more. Metho ds that compute up dates based only on the gradien t g are usually relatively robust and can handle smaller batc h sizes, like 100. Second-order metho ds, whic h also use the Hessian matrix H and compute up dates such as H − 1 g , t ypically require muc h larger batch sizes, like 10,000. These large batch sizes are required to minimize ﬂuctuations in the estimates of H − 1 g . Suppose 276 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS that H is estimated p erfectly but has a p o or condition n um b er. Multiplication b y H or its in v erse ampliﬁes pre-existing errors, in this case, estimation errors in g . V ery small c hanges in the estimate of g can thus cause large changes in the up date H − 1 g , even if H is estimated p erfectly . Of course, H is estimated only appro ximately , so the up date H − 1 g will contain even more error than we would predict from applying a p o orly conditioned op eration to the estimate of g . It is also crucial that the minibatches b e selected randomly . Computing an un biased estimate of the exp ected gradient from a set of samples requires that those samples b e indep endent. W e also wish for tw o subsequent gradient estimates to b e indep enden t from each other, so tw o subsequent minibatches of examples should also b e indep enden t from each other. Man y datasets are most naturally arranged in a w a y where successive examples are highly correlated. F or example, we migh t ha v e a dataset of medical data with a long list of blo o d sample test results. This list might b e arranged so that ﬁrst we ha v e ﬁve blo o d samples taken at diﬀerent times from the ﬁrst patient, then we ha v e three blo o d samples taken from the second patient, then the blo o d samples from the third patien t, and so on. If w e w ere to draw examples in order from this list, then each of our minibatches would b e extremely biased, b ecause it w ould represent primarily one patient out of the man y patients in the dataset. In cases suc h as these, where the order of the dataset holds some signiﬁcance, it is necessary to shuﬄe the examples b efore selecting minibatc hes. F or very large datasets, for example, datasets con taining billions of examples in a data cen ter, it can b e impractical to sample examples truly uniformly at random ev ery time we wan t to construct a minibatc h. F ortunately , in practice it is usually suﬃcient to shuﬄe the order of the dataset once and then store it in sh uﬄed fashion. This will imp ose a ﬁxed set of p ossible minibatc hes of consecutiv e examples that all mo dels trained thereafter will use, and each individual mo del will b e forced to reuse this ordering every time it passes through the training data. This deviation from true random selection do es not seem to hav e a signiﬁcan t detrimen tal eﬀect. F ailing to ever shuﬄe the examples in an y wa y can seriously reduce the eﬀectiv eness of the algorithm. Man y optimization problems in mac hine learning decomp ose ov er examples w ell enough that we can compute en tire separate up dates ov er diﬀerent examples in parallel. In other words, w e can compute the up date that minimizes J ( X ) for one minibatch of examples X at the same time that we compute the up date for sev eral other minibatch es. Suc h asynchronous parallel distributed approac hes are discussed further in section 12.1.3 . An interesting motiv ation for minibatch sto c hastic gradient descen t is that it follo ws the gradient of the true gener alization err or (equation 8.2 ) as long as no 277 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS examples are rep eated. Most implementations of minibatch sto chastic gradient descen t shuﬄe the dataset once and then pass through it multiple times. On the ﬁrst pass, each minibatch is used to compute an un biased estimate of the true generalization error. On the second pass, the estimate b ecomes biased b ecause it is formed b y resampling v alues that ha v e already b een used, rather than obtaining new fair samples from the data-generating distribution. The fact that sto c hastic gradient descent minimizes generalization error is easiest to see in online learning, where examples or minibatches are dra wn from a stream of data. In other words, instead of receiving a ﬁxed-size training set, the learner is similar to a living b eing who sees a new example at each instant, with ev ery example ( x , y ) coming from the data-generating distribution p data ( x , y ) . In this scenario, examples are nev er rep eated; ev ery exp erience is a fair sample from p data . The equiv alence is easiest to derive when b oth x and y are discrete. In this case, the generalization error (equation 8.2 ) can b e written as a sum J ∗ ( θ ) =  x  y p data ( x , y ) L ( f ( x ; θ ) , y ) , (8.7) with the exact gradient g = ∇ θ J ∗ ( θ ) =  x  y p data ( x , y ) ∇ θ L ( f ( x ; θ ) , y ) . (8.8) W e hav e already seen the same fact demonstrated for the log-lik eliho o d in equa- tion 8.5 and equation 8.6 ; we observe now that this holds for other functions L b esides the likelihoo d. A similar result can b e derived when x and y are contin uous, under mild assumptions regarding p data and L . Hence, w e can obtain an un biased estimator of the exact gradien t of the generalization error by sampling a minibatc h of examples { x (1) , . . . x ( m ) } with cor- resp onding targets y ( i ) from the data-generating distribution p data , then computing the gradient of the loss with resp ect to the parameters for that minibatch: ˆ g = 1 m ∇ θ  i L ( f ( x ( i ) ; θ ) , y ( i ) ) . (8.9) Up dating θ in the direction of ˆ g performs SGD on the generalization error. Of course, this in terpretation applies only when examples are not reused. Nonetheless, it is usually b est to make sev eral passes through the training set, unless the training set is extremely large. When multiple such ep o c hs are used, 278 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS only the ﬁrst ep o ch follows the unbiased gradien t of the generalization error, but of course, the additional ep o chs usually provide enough b eneﬁt due to decreased training error to oﬀset the harm they cause b y increasing the gap b et w een training error and test error. With some datasets gro wing rapidly in size, faster than computing p o wer, it is b ecoming more common for machine learning applications to use each training example only once or ev en to mak e an incomplete pass through the training set. When using an extremely large training set, ov erﬁtting is not an issue, so underﬁtting and computational eﬃciency b ecome the predominant concerns. See also Bottou and Bousquet ( 2008 ) for a discussion of the eﬀect of computational b ottlenec ks on generalization error, as the n um b er of training examples gro ws. 8.2 Challenges in Neural Net w ork Optimization Optimization in general is an extremely diﬃcult task. T raditionally , machine learning has av oided the diﬃculty of general optimization by carefully designing the ob jectiv e function and constraints to ensure that the optimization problem is con v ex. When training neural netw orks, we m ust confront the general noncon v ex case. Even conv ex optimization is not without its complications. In this section, w e summarize several of the most prominen t challenges inv olv ed in optimization for training deep mo dels. 8.2.1 Ill-Conditioning Some challenges arise even when optimizing conv ex functions. Of these, the most prominen t is ill-conditioning of the Hessian matrix H . This is a very general problem in most numerical optimization, conv ex or otherwise, and is describ ed in more detail in section 4.3.1 . The ill-conditioning problem is generally b elieved to be presen t in neural net w ork training problems. Ill-conditioning can manifest by causing SGD to get “stuc k” in the sense that even v ery small steps increase the cost function. Recall from equation 4.9 that a second-order T aylor series expansion of the cost function predicts that a gradient descen t step of −  g will add 1 2  2 g  H g −  g  g (8.10) to the cost. Ill-conditioning of the gradient b ecomes a problem when 1 2  2 g  H g exceeds  g  g . T o determine whether ill-conditioning is detrimental to a neural 279 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS − 50 0 50 100 150 200 250 T raining time (ep o c hs) − 2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 Gradient norm 0 50 100 150 200 250 T raining time (ep o c hs) 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 . 0 Classiﬁcation error rate Figure 8.1: Gradient descent often do es not arriv e at a critical p oint of any kind. In this example, the gradient norm increases throughout training of a conv olutional net w ork used for ob ject detection. (L eft) A scatterplot showing ho w the norms of individual gradien t ev aluations are distributed o v er time. T o improv e legibility , only one gradien t norm is plotted p er ep o ch. The running av erage of all gradient norms is plotted as a solid curv e. The gradient norm clearly increases ov er time, rather than decreasing as we would exp ect if the training pro cess con v erged to a critical p oint. (Right) Despite the increasing gradien t, the training pro cess is reasonably successful. The v alidation set classiﬁcation error decreases to a lo w level. net w ork training task, one can monitor the squared gradien t norm g  g and the g  H g term. In many cases, the gradient norm do es not shrink signiﬁcantly throughout learning, but the g  H g term gro ws b y more than an order of magnitude. The result is that learning b ecomes very slo w despite the presence of a strong gradien t b ecause the learning rate must b e shrunk to comp ensate for even stronger curv ature. Figure 8.1 sho ws an example of the gradien t increasing signiﬁcan tly during the successful training of a neural netw ork. Though ill-conditioning is present in other settings b esides neural netw ork training, some of the tec hniques used to com bat it in other contexts are less applicable to neural net w orks. F or example, Newton’s metho d is an excellent to ol for minimizing conv ex functions with p o orly conditioned Hessian matrices, but as w e argue in subsequent sections, Newton’s metho d requires signiﬁcant mo diﬁcation b efore it can b e applied to neural netw orks. 280 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS 8.2.2 Lo cal Minima One of the most prominent features of a conv ex optimization problem is that it can b e reduced to the problem of ﬁnding a lo cal minimum. Any lo cal minimum is guaran teed to b e a global minimum. Some con v ex functions ha v e a ﬂat region at the b ottom rather than a single global minim um p oint, but an y p oin t within suc h a ﬂat region is an acceptable solution. When optimizing a conv ex function, we kno w that w e hav e reac hed a go o d solution if we ﬁnd a critical p oint of any kind. With noncon v ex functions, suc h as neural nets, it is p ossible to hav e many lo cal minima. Indeed, nearly any deep mo del is essen tially guaranteed to hav e an extremely large n um b er of lo cal minima. As w e will see, ho w ever, this is not necessarily a ma jor problem. Neural net w orks and an y mo dels with m ultiple equiv alen tly parametrized laten t v ariables all hav e multiple lo cal minima b ecause of the mo del iden tiﬁabilit y problem. A mo del is said to b e iden tiﬁable if a suﬃcien tly large training set can rule out all but one setting of the mo del’s parameters. Mo dels with laten t v ariables are often not identiﬁable b ecause we can obtain equiv alent models by exc hanging laten t v ariables with each other. F or example, we could take a neural netw ork and mo dify la y er 1 by swapping the incoming w eigh t vector for unit i with the incoming w eigh t vector for unit j , then do the same for the outgoing w eight vectors. If we ha v e m la y ers with n units each, then there are n ! m w a ys of arranging the hidden units. This kind of nonidentiﬁabilit y is known as weigh t space symmetry . In addition to w eigh t space symmetry , many kinds of neural netw orks hav e additional causes of nonidentiﬁabilit y . F or example, in any rectiﬁed linear or maxout netw ork, we can scale all the incoming w eigh ts and biases of a unit by α if w e also scale all its outgoing weigh ts by 1 α . This means that—if the cost function do es not include terms suc h as w eigh t decay that dep end directly on the w eigh ts rather than the mo dels’ outputs—every lo cal minimum of a rectiﬁed linear or maxout netw ork lies on an ( m × n ) -dimensional hyperb ola of equiv alen t lo cal minima. These mo del identiﬁabilit y issues mean that a neural net work cost function can hav e an extremely large or even uncountably inﬁnite amount of lo cal minima. Ho w ev er, all these lo cal minima arising from noniden tiﬁabilit y are equiv alent to eac h other in cost function v alue. As a result, these lo cal minima are not a problematic form of nonconv exity . Lo cal minima can b e problematic if they ha v e high cost in comparison to the global minimum. One can construct small neural netw orks, ev en without hidden units, that hav e lo cal minima with higher cost than the global minim um ( Son tag 281 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS and Sussman , 1989 ; Brady et al. , 1989 ; Gori and T esi , 1992 ). If lo cal minima with high cost are common, this could p ose a serious problem for gradien t-based optimization algorithms. Whether netw orks of practical interest ha v e many lo cal minima of high cost and whether optimization algorithms encoun ter them remain op en questions. F or man y years, most practitioners b eliev ed that lo cal minima w ere a common problem plaguing neural netw ork optimization. T o da y , that do es not app ear to b e the case. The problem remains an activ e area of research, but exp erts now susp ect that, for suﬃciently large neural net works, most lo cal minima hav e a low cost function v alue, and that it is not imp ortant to ﬁnd a true global minim um rather than to ﬁnd a p oint in parameter space that has lo w but not minimal cost ( Saxe et al. , 2013 ; Dauphin et al. , 2014 ; Go o dfellow et al. , 2015 ; Choromansk a et al. , 2014 ). Man y practitioners attribute nearly all diﬃculty with neural netw ork optimiza- tion to lo cal minima. W e encourage practitioners to carefully test for sp eciﬁc problems. A test that can rule out lo cal minima as the problem is plotting the norm of the gradient o v er time. If the norm of the gradien t do es not shrink to insigniﬁcan t size, the problem is neither lo cal minima nor an y other kind of critical p oin t. In high-dimensional spaces, p ositively establishing that lo cal minima are the problem can b e very diﬃcult. Many structures other than lo cal minima also ha v e small gradien ts. 8.2.3 Plateaus, Saddle Poin ts and Other Flat Regions F or man y high-dimensional nonconv ex functions, lo cal minima (and maxima) are in fact rare compared to another kind of p oint with zero gradient: a saddle p oin t. Some p oin ts around a saddle p oint hav e greater cost than the saddle p oint, while others hav e a lo w er cost. At a saddle point, the Hessian matrix has both p ositiv e and negative eigen v alues. P oints lying along eigen vectors asso ciated with p ositiv e eigenv alues hav e greater cost than the saddle p oin t, while p oints lying along negative eigenv alues ha v e low er v alue. W e can think of a saddle p oint as b eing a lo cal minim um along one cross-section of the cost function and a lo cal maxim um along another cross-section. See ﬁgure 4.5 for an illustration. Man y classes of random functions exhibit the follo wing behavior: in low- dimensional spaces, lo cal minima are common. In higher-dimensional spaces, lo cal minima are rare, and saddle p oints are more common. F or a function f : R n → R of this type, the exp ected ratio of the n um b er of saddle p oin ts to lo cal minima grows exp onen tially with n . T o understand the intuition b ehind this b ehavior, observ e that the Hessian matrix at a lo cal minimum has only p ositive eigenv alues. The 282 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS Hessian matrix at a saddle p oin t has a mixture of p ositiv e and negative eigenv alues. Imagine that the sign of eac h eigen v alue is generated by ﬂipping a coin. In a single dimension, it is easy to obtain a lo cal minimum by tossing a coin and getting heads once. In n -dimensional space, it is exp onentially unlikely that all n coin tosses will b e heads. See Dauphin et al. ( 2014 ) for a review of the relev ant theoretical work. An amazing prop ert y of many random functions is that the eigenv alues of the Hessian b ecome more lik ely to b e p ositive as we reach regions of low er cost. In our coin tossing analogy , this means w e are more likely to hav e our coin come up heads n times if we are at a critical p oin t with low cost. It also means that lo cal minima are muc h more lik ely to hav e low cost than high cost. Critical p oin ts with high cost are far more likely to b e saddle p oin ts. Critical p oin ts with extremely high cost are more lik ely to b e lo cal maxima. This happ ens for many classes of random functions. Does it happ en for neural net w orks? Baldi and Hornik ( 1989 ) sho w ed theoretically that shallo w auto enco ders (feedforw ard netw orks trained to cop y their input to their output, describ ed in c hapter 14 ) with no nonlinearities hav e global minima and saddle p oin ts but no lo cal minima with higher cost than the global minimum. They observ ed without pro of that these results extend to deep er netw orks without nonlinearities. The output of suc h net w orks is a linear function of their input, but they are useful to study as a mo del of nonlinear neural netw orks b ecause their loss function is a nonconv ex function of their parameters. Suc h net w orks are essen tially just m ultiple matrices comp osed together. Saxe et al. ( 2013 ) provided exact solutions to the complete learning dynamics in such net w orks and sho wed that learning in these mo dels captures many of the qualitative features observed in the training of deep mo dels with nonlinear activ ation functions. Dauphin et al. ( 2014 ) show ed exp erimen tally that real neural netw orks also hav e loss functions that contain v ery man y high-cost saddle p oin ts. Choromansk a et al. ( 2014 ) pro vided additional theoretical arguments, showing that another class of high-dimensional random functions related to neural net w orks do es so as w ell. What are the implications of the proliferation of saddle p oints for training algorithms? F or ﬁrst-order optimization, algorithms that use only gradien t infor- mation, the situation is unclear. The gradien t can often b ecome very small near a saddle p oint. On the other hand, gradien t descent empirically seems able to escap e saddle p oints in man y cases. Go o dfellow et al. ( 2015 ) provided visualizations of sev eral learning tra jectories of state-of-the-art neural netw orks, with an example giv en in ﬁ gure 8.2 . These visualizations show a ﬂattening of the cost function near a prominent saddle p oint, where the weigh ts are all zero, but they also show the gradien t descent tra jectory rapidly escaping this region. Goo dfellow et al. ( 2015 ) 283 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS Pro jection 2 of θ Pro jection 1 of θ J( θ ) Figure 8.2: A visualization of the cost function of a neural net work. These visualizations app ear similar for feedforward neural netw orks, conv olutional net works, and recurrent net works applied to real ob ject recognition and natural language pro cessing tasks. Sur- prisingly , these visualizations usually do not show many conspicuous obstacles. Prior to the success of sto chastic gradien t descent for training very large mo dels b eginning in roughly 2012, neural net cost function surfaces were generally b elieved to ha v e muc h more noncon vex structure than is rev ealed by these pro jections. The primary obstacle revealed b y this pro jection is a saddle p oint of high cost near where the parameters are initialized, but, as indicated b y the blue path, the SGD training tra jectory escap es this saddle p oint readily . Most of training time is sp ent trav ersing the relatively ﬂat v alley of the cost function, p erhaps b ecause of high noise in the gradient, p o or conditioning of the Hessian matrix in this region, or simply the need to circumnavigate the tall “mountain” visible in the ﬁgure via an indirect arcing path. Image adapted with p ermission from Go o dfellow et al. ( 2015 ). also argue that con tin uous-time gradient descen t may b e sho wn analytically to b e rep elled from, rather than attracted to, a nearb y saddle p oint, but the situation ma y b e diﬀeren t for more realistic uses of gradien t descent. F or Newton’s metho d, saddle p oints clearly constitute a problem. Gradien t descen t is designed to mov e “downhill” and is not explicitly designed to seek a critical p oint. Newton’s metho d, ho w ev er, is designed to solve for a p oin t where the gradien t is zero. Without appropriate mo diﬁcation, it can jump to a saddle p oin t. The proliferation of saddle p oints in high-dimensional spaces presumably explains wh y second-order metho ds hav e not succeeded in replacing gradient descent for neural net w ork training. Dauphin et al. ( 2014 ) introduced a saddle-free Newton metho d for second-order optimization and show ed that it impro v es signiﬁcantly o v er the traditional v ersion. Second-order metho ds remain diﬃcult to scale to large neural netw orks, but this saddle-free approach holds promise if it can b e scaled. 284 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS        Figure 8.3: The ob jectiv e function for highly nonlinear deep neural netw orks or for recurren t neural netw orks often con tains sharp nonlinearities in parameter space resulting from the multiplication of several parameters. These nonlinearities give rise to very high deriv atives in some places. When the parameters get close to such a cliﬀ region, a gradien t descent up date can catapult the parameters v ery far, p ossibly losing most of the optimization work that has b een done. Figure adapted with p ermission from Pascan u et al. ( 2013 ). There are other kinds of p oints with zero gradien t b esides minima and saddle p oin ts. Maxima are muc h like saddle p oin ts from the p ersp ective of optimization— man y algorithms are not attracted to them, but unmo diﬁed Newton’s metho d is. Maxima of many classes of random functions b ecome exp onen tially rare in high-dimensional space, just as minima do. There ma y also b e wide, ﬂat regions of constan t v alue. In these lo cations, the gradient and the Hessian are all zero. Such degenerate lo cations p ose ma jor problems for all numerical optimization algorithms. In a con v ex problem, a wide, ﬂat region must consist en tirely of global minima, but in a general optimization problem, such a region could corresp ond to a high v alue of the ob jectiv e function. 8.2.4 Cliﬀs and Explo ding Gradien ts Neural netw orks with many la y ers often ha v e extremely steep regions resembling cliﬀs, as illustrated in ﬁgure 8.3 . These result from the multiplication of several large weigh ts together. On the face of an extremely steep cliﬀ structure, the gradien t up date step can mo v e the parameters extremely far, usually jumping oﬀ the cliﬀ structure altogether. The cliﬀ can b e dangerous whether we approac h it from ab ov e or from b elo w, 285 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS but fortunately its most serious consequences can b e av oided using the gradien t clipping heuristic describ ed in section 10.11.1 . The basic idea is to recall that the gradien t sp eciﬁes not the optimal step size, but only the optimal direction within an inﬁnitesimal region. When the traditional gradient descen t algorithm prop oses making a very large step, the gradient clipping heuristic interv enes to reduce the step size, making it less likely to go outside the region where the gradien t indicates the direction of appro ximately steep est descent. Cliﬀ structures are most common in the cost functions for recurrent neural netw orks, b ecause such mo dels inv olve a m ultiplication of many factors, with one factor for each time step. Long temp oral sequences thus incur an extreme amount of multiplication. 8.2.5 Long-T erm Dep endencies Another diﬃcult y that neural netw ork optimization algorithms must ov ercome arises when the computational graph becomes extremely deep. F eedforw ard net w orks with many la y ers hav e such deep computational graphs. So do recurren t net w orks, describ ed in chapter 10 , whic h construct v ery deep computational graphs b y rep eatedly applying the same op eration at eac h time step of a long temp oral sequence. Rep eated application of the same parameters giv es rise to esp ecially pronounced diﬃculties. F or example, supp ose that a computational graph con tains a path that consists of rep eatedly m ultiplying by a matrix W . After t steps, this is equiv alent to m ul- tiplying by W t . Suppose that W has an eigendecomp osition W = V diag ( λ ) V − 1 . In this simple case, it is straigh tforw ard to see that W t =  V diag ( λ ) V − 1  t = V diag ( λ ) t V − 1 . (8.11) An y eigenv alues λ i that are not near an absolute v alue of 1 will either explo de if they are greater than 1 in magnitude or v anish if they are less than 1 in magnitude. The v anishing and explo ding gradient problem refers to the fact that gradients through such a graph are also scaled according to diag ( λ ) t . V anishing gradients mak e it diﬃcult to kno w which direction the parameters should mov e to improv e the cost function, while explo ding gradien ts can make learning unstable. The cliﬀ structures describ ed earlier that motiv ate gradien t clipping are an example of the explo ding gradient phenomenon. The rep eated multiplication by W at each time step describ ed here is ver y similar to the p o w er metho d algorithm used to ﬁnd the largest eigen v alue of a matrix W and the corresp onding eigenv ector. F rom this p oint of view it is not surprising that x  W t will even tually discard all comp onents of x that are orthogonal to the principal eigen v ector of W . 286 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS Recurren t net w orks use the same matrix W at eac h time step, but feedforw ard net w orks do not, so even very deep feedforw ard netw orks can largely a v oid the v anishing and explo ding gradient problem ( Sussillo , 2014 ). W e defer further discussion of the c hallenges of training recurren t netw orks un til section 10.7 , after recurren t netw orks ha ve b een describ ed in more detail. 8.2.6 Inexact Gradien ts Most optimization algorithms are designed with the assumption that we hav e access to the exact gradient or Hessian matrix. In practice, we usually ha ve only a noisy or even biased estimate of these quan tities. Nearly ev ery deep learning algorithm relies on sampling-based estimates, at least insofar as using a minibatch of training examples to compute the gradien t. In other cases, the ob jective function we wan t to minimize is actually intractable. When the ob jective function is intractable, t ypically its gradien t is intractable as w ell. In such cases we can only approximate the gradient. These issues mostly arise with the more adv anced mo dels w e co v er in part I I I . F or example, con trastiv e div ergence giv es a tec hnique for appro ximating the gradien t of the in tractable log-lik eliho o d of a Boltzmann mac hine. V arious neural net work optimization algorithms are designed to account for imp erfections in the gradient estimate. One can also a v oid the problem by c ho osing a surrogate loss function that is easier to appro ximate than the true loss. 8.2.7 P o or Corresp ondence b etw een Lo cal and Global Structure Man y of the problems we hav e discussed so far corresp ond to prop erties of the loss function at a single p oint—it can b e diﬃcult to make a single step if J ( θ ) is p o orly conditioned at the current p oint θ , or if θ lies on a cliﬀ, or if θ is a saddle p oin t hiding the opp ortunity to make progress downhill from the gradient. It is p ossible to o v ercome all these problems at a single p oin t and still p erform p o orly if the direction that results in the most improv emen t lo cally do es not p oin t to w ard distant regions of m uc h low er cost. Go o dfello w et al. ( 2015 ) argue that muc h of the run time of training is due to the length of the tra jectory needed to arriv e at the solution. Figure 8.2 shows that the learning tra jectory sp ends most of its time tracing out a wide arc around a moun tain-shap ed structure. Muc h of research in to the diﬃculties of optimization has fo cused on whether 287 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS θ J ( θ ) Figure 8.4: Optimization based on lo cal do wnhill mov es can fail if the lo cal surface do es not p oint tow ard the global solution. Here w e provide an example of how this can o ccur, ev en if there are no saddle p oints or lo cal minima. This example cost function con tains only asymptotes tow ard low v alues, not minima. The main cause of diﬃcult y in this case is b eing initialized on the wrong side of the “mountain” and not b eing able to trav erse it. In higher-dimensional space, learning algorithms can often circumna vigate such mountains, but the tra jectory asso ciated with doing so ma y b e long and result in excessiv e training time, as illustrated in ﬁgure 8.2 . training arrives at a global minimum, a lo cal minimum, or a saddle p oint, but in practice, neural net w orks do not arrive at a critical p oin t of an y kind. Figure 8.1 sho ws that neural netw orks often do not arrive at a region of small gradient. Indeed, suc h critical p oints do not even necessarily exist. F or example, the loss function − log p ( y | x ; θ ) can lack a global minim um point and instead asymptotically approac h some v alue as the mo del b ecomes more conﬁdent. F or a classiﬁer with discrete y and p ( y | x ) provided by a softmax, the negative log-lik eliho o d can b ecome arbitrarily close to zero if the mo del is able to correctly classify every example in the training set, but it is imp ossible to actually reac h the v alue of zero. Likewise, a mo del of real v alues p ( y | x ) = N ( y ; f ( θ ) , β − 1 ) can ha v e negative log-lik eliho o d that asymptotes to negativ e inﬁnity—if f ( θ ) is able to correctly predict the v alue of all training set y targets, the learning algorithm will increase β without b ound. See ﬁgure 8.4 for an example of a failure of lo cal optimization to ﬁnd a go o d cost function v alue ev en in the absence of any lo cal minima or saddle p oints. F uture research will need to develop further understanding of the factors that inﬂuence the length of the learning tra jectory and b etter characterize the outcome of the pro cess. 288 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS Man y existing research directions are aimed at ﬁnding go o d initial p oints for problems that hav e diﬃcult global structure, rather than at developing algorithms that use nonlo cal mov es. Gradien t descent and essen tially all learning algorithms that are eﬀective for training neural netw orks are based on making small lo cal mo v es. The previous sections hav e primarily fo cused on how the correct direction of these lo cal mov es can b e diﬃcult to compute. W e may b e able to compute some prop erties of the ob jectiv e function, suc h as its gradient, only approximately , with bias or v ariance in our estimate of the correct direction. In these cases, lo cal descent ma y or ma y not deﬁne a reasonably short path to a v alid solution, but we are not actually able to follow the lo cal descent path. The ob jectiv e function may ha v e issues, suc h as p o or conditioning or discon tinuous gradients, causing the region where the gradient pro vides a go o d mo del of the ob jectiv e function to b e v ery small. In these cases, lo cal descen t with steps of size  ma y deﬁne a reasonably short path to the solution, but we are only able to compute the lo cal descen t direction with steps of size δ   . In these cases, lo cal descent ma y deﬁne a path to the solution, but the path con tains many steps, so following it incurs a high computational cost. Sometimes lo cal information provides us no guide, such as when the function has a wide ﬂat region, or if we manage to land exactly on a critical p oint (usually this latter scenario only happ ens to metho ds that solv e explicitly for critical p oints, suc h as Newton’s metho d). In these cases, lo cal descen t do es not deﬁne a path to a solution at all. In other cases, lo cal mov es can b e to o greedy and lead us along a path that mo v es downhill but aw ay from any solution, as in ﬁgure 8.4 , or along an unnecessarily long tra jectory to the solution, as in ﬁgure 8.2 . Curren tly , we do not understand which of these problems are most relev an t to making neural netw ork optimization diﬃcult, and this is an activ e area of research. Regardless of whic h of these problems are most signiﬁcant, all of them might b e a v oided if there exists a region of space connected reasonably directly to a solution b y a path that lo cal descent can follow, and if we are able to initialize learning within that w ell-b ehav ed region. This last view suggests research into choosing go o d initial p oin ts for traditional optimization algorithms to use. 8.2.8 Theoretical Limits of Optimization Sev eral theoretical results show that there are limits on the p erformance of any optimization algorithm w e might design for neural net w orks ( Blum and Rivest , 1992 ; Judd , 1989 ; W olpert and MacReady , 1997 ). T ypically these results ha v e little b earing on the use of neural netw orks in practice. 289 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS Some theoretical results apply only when the units of a neural net w ork output discrete v alues. Most neural netw ork units output smo othly increasing v alues that make optimization via lo cal search feasible. Some theoretical results show that there exist problem classes that are intractable, but it can b e diﬃcult to tell whether a particular problem falls into that class. Other results sho w that ﬁnding a solution for a net w ork of a given size is in tractable, but in practice w e can ﬁnd a solution easily by using a larger netw ork for whic h many more parameter settings corresp ond to an acceptable solution. Moreov er, in the context of neural netw ork training, we usually do not care ab out ﬁnding the exact minimum of a function, but seek only to reduce its v alue suﬃcien tly to obtain go o d generalization error. Theoretical analysis of whether an optimization algorithm can accomplish this goal is extremely diﬃcult. Developing more realistic b ounds on the p erformance of optimization algorithms therefore remains an imp ortant goal for mac hine learning researc h. 8.3 Basic Algorithms W e hav e previously in tro duced the gradient descen t (section 4.3 ) algorithm that follo ws the gradient of an entire training set downhill. This may b e accelerated considerably by using sto c hastic gradient descent to follow the gradien t of randomly selected minibatches do wnhill, as discussed in section 5.9 and section 8.1.3 . 8.3.1 Sto c hastic Gradient Descent Sto c hastic gradient descent (SGD) and its v ariants are probably the most used optimization algorithms for machine learning in general and for deep learning in particular. As discussed in section 8.1.3 , it is p ossible to obtain an unbiased estimate of the gradien t b y taking the a verage gradien t on a minibatch of m examples drawn i.i.d from the data-generating distribution. Algorithm 8.1 sho ws how to follow this estimate of the gradient do wnhill. A crucial parameter for the SGD algorithm is the learning rate. Previously , we ha v e describ ed SGD as using a ﬁxed learning rate  . In practice, it is necessary to gradually decrease the learning rate ov er time, so we no w denote the learning rate at iteration k as  k . This is b ecause the SGD gradien t estimator introduces a source of noise (the random sampling of m training examples) that do es not v anish even when we arriv e at a minim um. By comparison, the true gradient of the total cost function b ecomes small and then 0 when we approach and reach a minimum using batch gradient 290 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS Algorithm 8.1 Sto chastic gradien t descent (SGD) up date Require: Learning rate schedule  1 ,  2 , . . . Require: Initial parameter θ k ← 1 while stopping criterion not met do Sample a minibatch of m examples from the training set { x (1) , . . . , x ( m ) } with corresp onding targets y ( i ) . Compute gradient estimate: ˆ g ← 1 m ∇ θ  i L ( f ( x ( i ) ; θ ) , y ( i ) ) Apply up date: θ ← θ −  k ˆ g k ← k + 1 end while descen t, so batch gradient descen t can use a ﬁxed learning rate. A suﬃcient condition to guaran tee conv ergence of SGD is that ∞  k =1  k = ∞ , and (8.12) ∞  k =1  2 k < ∞ . (8.13) In practice, it is common to deca y the learning rate linearly until iteration τ :  k = (1 − α )  0 + α τ (8.14) with α = k τ . After iteration τ , it is common to leav e  constant. The learning rate may b e c hosen b y trial and error, but it is usually b est to choose it by monitoring learning curv es that plot the ob jectiv e function as a function of time. This is more of an art than a science, and most guidance on this sub ject should b e regarded with some sk epticism. When using the linear sc hedule, the parameters to choose are  0 ,  τ , and τ . Usually τ ma y b e set to the num b er of iterations required to make a few h undred passes through the training set. Usually  τ should b e set to roughly 1 p ercent the v alue of  0 . The main question is how to set  0 . If it is to o large, the learning curve will show violen t oscillations, with the cost function often increasing signiﬁcantly . Gentle oscillations are ﬁne, esp ecially if training with a sto chastic cost function, such as the cost function arising from the use of drop out. If the learning rate is to o low, learning pro ceeds slowly , and if the initial learning rate is to o low, learning may b ecome stuck with a high cost v alue. T ypically , the optimal initial learning rate, in terms of total training time and the 291 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS ﬁnal cost v alue, is higher than the learning rate that yields the b est p erformance after the ﬁrst 100 iterations or so. Therefore, it is usually b est to monitor the ﬁrst sev eral iterations and use a learning rate that is higher than the b est-p erforming learning rate at this time, but not so high that it causes sev ere instability . The most imp ortant prop erty of SGD and related minibatch or online gradien t- based optimization is that computation time p er up date do es not grow with the n um b er of training examples. This allows conv ergence even when the num b er of training examples b ecomes very large. F or a large enough dataset, SGD may con v erge to within some ﬁxed tolerance of its ﬁnal test set error b efore it has pro cessed the en tire training set. T o study the conv ergence rate of an optimization algorithm it is common to measure the excess error J ( θ ) − min θ J ( θ ) , which is the amoun t by which the curren t cost function exceeds the minimum p ossible cost. When SGD is applied to a con v ex problem, the excess error is O ( 1 √ k ) after k iterations, while in the strongly con v ex case, it is O ( 1 k ) . These b ounds cannot b e improv ed unless extra conditions are assumed. Batc h gradient descent enjoys b etter conv ergence rates than sto c hastic gradien t descent in theory . Ho wev er, the Cramér-Rao b ound ( Cramér , 1946 ; Rao , 1945 ) states that generalization error cannot decrease faster than O ( 1 k ) . Bottou and Bousquet ( 2008 ) argue that it therefore may not b e worth while to pursue an optimization algorithm that conv erges faster than O ( 1 k ) for machine learning tasks—faster conv ergence presumably corresp onds to ov erﬁtting. Moreo ver, the asymptotic analysis obscures man y adv antages that sto chastic gradient descen t has after a small num b er of steps. With large datasets, the ability of SGD to mak e rapid initial progress while ev aluating the gradien t for v ery few examples out w eighs its slow asymptotic con v ergence. Most of the algorithms describ ed in the remainder of this chapter ac hiev e b eneﬁts that matter in practice but are lost in the constant factors obscured by the O ( 1 k ) asymptotic analysis. One can also trade oﬀ the b eneﬁts of b oth batch and sto chastic gradient descen t by gradually increasing the minibatc h size during the course of learning. F or more information on SGD, see Bottou ( 1998 ). 8.3.2 Momen tum While sto chastic gradient descen t remains a p opular optimization strategy , learning with it can sometimes b e slo w. The method of momen tum ( P olyak , 1964 ) is designed to accelerate learning, esp ecially in the face of high curv ature, small but consisten t gradients, or noisy gradients. The momen tum algorithm accumulates an exp onentially deca ying moving av erage of past gradien ts and con tin ues to mo v e 292 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS − 30 − 20 − 10 0 10 20 − 30 − 20 − 10 0 10 20 Figure 8.5: Momentum aims primarily to solve tw o problems: p o or conditioning of the Hessian matrix and v ariance in the sto chastic gradient. Here, we illustrate how momentum o vercomes the ﬁrst of these tw o problems. The contour lines depict a quadratic loss function with a p o orly conditioned Hessian matrix. The red path cutting across the con tours indicates the path follow ed by the momentum learning rule as it minimizes this function. At each step along the w ay , w e dra w an arrow indicating the step that gradient descen t w ould take at that point. W e can see that a p o orly conditioned quadratic ob jectiv e lo oks like a long, narro w v alley or can y on with steep sides. Momentum correctly trav erses the cany on lengthwise, while gradien t steps waste time moving back and forth across the narro w axis of the can y on. Compare also ﬁgure 4.6 , which shows the b eha vior of gradient descen t without momentum. in their direction. The eﬀect of momentum is illustrated in ﬁgure 8.5 . F ormally , the momentum algorithm introduces a v ariable v that plays the role of velocity—it is the direction and sp eed at which the parameters mov e through parameter space. The velocity is set to an exp onentially deca ying av erage of the negativ e gradient. The name momen tum deriv es from a physical analogy , in whic h the negativ e gradient is a force moving a particle through parameter space, according to Newton’s laws of motion. Momen tum in physics is mass times v elo cit y . In the momentum learning algorithm, we assume unit mass, so the v elo cit y vector v ma y also be regarded as the momentum of the particle. A h yp erparameter α ∈ [0 , 1) determines how quickly the contributions of previous gradien ts exp onentially decay . The up date rule is giv en by v ← α v −  ∇ θ  1 m m  i =1 L ( f ( x ( i ) ; θ ) , y ( i ) )  , (8.15) θ ← θ + v . (8.16) 293 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS Algorithm 8.2 Sto chastic gradien t descent (SGD) with momentum Require: Learning rate  , momentum parameter α Require: Initial parameter θ , initial velocity v while stopping criterion not met do Sample a minibatch of m examples from the training set { x (1) , . . . , x ( m ) } with corresp onding targets y ( i ) . Compute gradient estimate: g ← 1 m ∇ θ  i L ( f ( x ( i ) ; θ ) , y ( i ) ) . Compute velocity up date: v ← α v −  g . Apply up date: θ ← θ + v . end while The velocity v accum ulates the gradient elemen ts ∇ θ  1 m  m i =1 L ( f ( x ( i ) ; θ ) , y ( i ) )  . The larger α is relative to  , the more previous gradien ts aﬀect the curren t direction. The SGD algorithm with momen tum is giv en in algorithm 8.2 . Previously , the size of the step was simply the norm of the gradient multiplied b y the learning rate. No w, the size of the step dep ends on how large and ho w aligned a se quenc e of gradien ts are. The step size is largest when man y successive gradien ts p oint in exactly the same direction. If the momentum algorithm alwa ys observ es gradient g , then it will accelerate in the direction of − g , until reac hing a terminal velocity where the size of each step is  || g || 1 − α . (8.17) It is thus helpful to think of the momentum h yp erparameter in terms of 1 1 − α . F or example, α = 0 . 9 corresp onds to multiplying the maxim um sp eed b y 10 relative to the gradient descen t algorithm. Common v alues of α used in practice include 0 . 5 , 0 . 9 , and 0 . 99 . Like the learning rate, α ma y also b e adapted ov er time. T ypically it b egins with a small v alue and is later raised. A dapting α o v er time is less imp ortant than shrinking  o v er time. W e can view the momentum algorithm as simulating a particle sub ject to con tin uous-time Newtonian dynamics. The ph ysical analogy can help build in tuition for how the momentum and gradient descent algorithms b ehav e. The p osition of the particle at an y p oint in time is given b y θ ( t ) . The particle exp eriences net force f ( t ) . This force causes the particle to accelerate: f ( t ) = ∂ 2 ∂ t 2 θ ( t ) . (8.18) 294 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS Rather than viewing this as a second-order diﬀerential equation of the p osition, w e can introduce the v ariable v ( t ) representing the v elo cit y of the particle at time t and rewrite the Newtonian dynamics as a ﬁrst-order diﬀerential equation: v ( t ) = ∂ ∂ t θ ( t ) , (8.19) f ( t ) = ∂ ∂ t v ( t ) . (8.20) The momentum algorithm then consists of solving the diﬀerential equations via n umerical sim ulation. A simple numerical metho d for solving diﬀerential equations is Euler’s metho d, which simply consists of simulating the dynamics deﬁned by the equation b y taking small, ﬁnite steps in the direction of each gradien t. This explains the basic form of the momentum up date, but what sp eciﬁcally are the forces? One force is prop ortional to the negativ e gradient of the cost function: −∇ θ J ( θ ) . This force pushes the particle downhill along the cost function surface. The gradient descent algorithm would simply tak e a single step based on eac h gradien t, but the Newtonian scenario used by the momentum algorithm instead uses this force to alter the v elo cit y of the particle. W e can think of the particle as b eing like a ho ck ey puck sliding down an icy surface. Whenev er it descends a steep part of the surface, it gathers sp eed and con tin ues sliding in that direction un til it b egins to go uphill again. One other force is necessary . If the only force is the gradien t of the cost function, then the particle migh t never come to rest. Imagine a ho c key puck sliding down one side of a v alley and straight up the other side, oscillating back and forth forever, assuming the ice is p erfectly frictionless. T o resolve this problem, we add one other force, prop ortional to − v ( t ) . In physics terminology , this force corresp onds to viscous drag, as if the particle must push through a resistant medium such as syrup. This causes the particle to gradually lose energy ov er time and even tually con v erge to a lo cal minim um. Wh y do w e use − v ( t ) and viscous drag in particular? P art of the reason to use − v ( t ) is mathematical con v enience—an integer p ow er of the velocity is easy to work with. Y et other physical systems ha v e other kinds of drag based on other in teger p ow ers of the velocity . F or example, a particle trav eling through the air exp eriences turbulent drag, with force prop ortional to the square of the velocity , while a particle mo ving along the ground exp eriences dry friction, with a force of constant magnitude. W e can reject eac h of these options. T urbulent drag, prop ortional to the square of the velocity , b ecomes v ery w eak when the velocity is small. It is not p ow erful enough to force the particle to come to rest. A particle with a nonzero initial v elo cit y that exp eriences only the force of turbulent drag 295 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS will mo v e a w a y from its initial p osition forever, with the distance from the starting p oin t growing like O ( log t ) . W e must therefore use a low er p o w er of the v elo cit y . If we use a p ow er of zero, represen ting dry friction, then the force is to o strong. When the force due to the gradien t of the cost function is small but nonzero, the constan t force due to friction can cause the particle to come to rest b efore reac hing a lo cal minim um. Viscous drag av oids b oth of these problems—it is weak enough that the gradient can con tinue to cause motion until a minim um is reached, but strong enough to preven t motion if the gradient do es not justify moving. 8.3.3 Nestero v Momen tum Sutsk ev er et al. ( 2013 ) introduced a v arian t of the momen tum algorithm that was inspired by Nesterov’s accelerated gradien t metho d ( Nesterov , 1983 , 2004 ). The up date rules in this case are giv en by v ← α v −  ∇ θ  1 m m  i =1 L  f ( x ( i ) ; θ + α v ) , y ( i )   , (8.21) θ ← θ + v , (8.22) where the parameters α and  pla y a similar role as in the standard momen tum metho d. The diﬀerence b etw een Nestero v momen tum and standard momentum is where the gradient is ev aluated. With Nestero v momentum, the gradien t is ev aluated after the current v elo cit y is applied. Th us one can in terpret Nesterov momen tum as attempting to add a c orr e ction factor to the standard method of momen tum. The complete Nestero v momen tum algorithm is presen ted in algorithm 8.3 . In the con v ex batch gradien t case, Nestero v momentum brings the rate of con v ergence of the excess error from O (1 /k ) (after k steps) to O (1 /k 2 ) as shown b y Nestero v ( 1983 ). Unfortunately , in the sto chastic gradient case, Nesterov momen tum do es not improv e the rate of conv ergence. 8.4 P arameter Initialization Strategies Some optimization algorithms are not iterative by nature and simply solve for a solution p oint. Other optimization algorithms are iterative by nature but, when applied to the right class of optimization problems, conv erge to acceptable solutions in an acceptable amoun t of time regardless of initialization. Deep learning training algorithms usually do not hav e either of these luxuries. T raining algorithms for 296 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS Algorithm 8.3 Sto chastic gradien t descent (SGD) with Nesterov momentum Require: Learning rate  , momentum parameter α Require: Initial parameter θ , initial velocity v while stopping criterion not met do Sample a minibatch of m examples from the training set { x (1) , . . . , x ( m ) } with corresp onding lab els y ( i ) . Apply interim up date: ˜ θ ← θ + α v . Compute gradient (at interim point): g ← 1 m ∇ ˜ θ  i L ( f ( x ( i ) ; ˜ θ ) , y ( i ) ) . Compute velocity up date: v ← α v −  g . Apply up date: θ ← θ + v . end while deep learning mo dels are usually iterativ e and thus require the user to sp ecify some initial p oint from whic h to b egin the iterations. Moreo ver, training deep mo dels is a suﬃciently diﬃcult task that most algorithms are strongly aﬀected b y the choice of initialization. The initial p oint can determine whether the algorithm con v erges at all, with some initial p oints b eing so unstable that the algorithm encounters n umerical diﬃculties and fails altogether. When learning do es conv erge, the initial p oin t can determine ho w quickly learning con v erges and whether it conv erges to a p oint with high or lo w cost. Also, p oints of comparable cost can hav e wildly v arying generalization error, and the initial p oin t can aﬀect the generalization as well. Mo dern initialization strategies are simple and heuristic. Designing impro v ed initialization strategies is a diﬃcult task b ecause neural net w ork optimization is not y et w ell understoo d. Most initialization strategies are based on achieving some nice prop erties when the netw ork is initialized. Ho wev er, w e do not ha ve a go o d understanding of whic h of these prop erties are preserv ed under whic h circumstances after learning b egins to pro ceed. A further diﬃculty is that some initial p oints ma y b e b eneﬁcial from the viewp oint of optimization but detrimen tal from the viewp oin t of generalization. Our understanding of how the initial point aﬀects generalization is esp ecially primitiv e, oﬀering little to no guidance for how to select the initial p oin t. P erhaps the only prop erty kno wn with complete certaint y is that the initial parameters need to “break symmetry” b et w een diﬀerent units. If tw o hidden units with the same activ ation function are connected to the same inputs, then these units must hav e diﬀerent initial parameters. If they hav e the same initial parameters, then a deterministic learning algorithm applied to a deterministic cost and mo del will constantly up date b oth of these units in the same wa y . Ev en if the 297 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS mo del or training algorithm is capable of using sto chasticit y to compute diﬀerent up dates for diﬀeren t units (for example, if one trains with drop out), it is usually b est to initialize eac h unit to compute a diﬀerent function from all the other units. This may help to make sure that no input patterns are lost in the null space of forward propagation and that no gradient patterns are lost in the null space of back-propagation. The goal of having each unit compute a diﬀerent function motiv ates random initialization of the parameters. W e could explicitly searc h for a large set of basis functions that are all m utually diﬀerent from eac h other, but this often incurs a noticeable computational cost. F or example, if we ha v e at most as many outputs as inputs, we could use Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization on an initial w eigh t matrix and b e guaranteed that each unit would compute a very diﬀeren t function from eac h other unit. Random initialization from a high-entrop y distribution o v er a high-dimensional space is computationally cheaper and unlikely to assign an y units to compute the same function as eac h other. T ypically , we set the biases for each unit to heuristically chosen constan ts, and initialize only the weigh ts randomly . Extra parameters—for example, parameters enco ding the conditional v ariance of a prediction—are usually set to heuristically c hosen constants m uc h like the biases are. W e almost alw a ys initialize all the w eights in the model to v alues dra wn randomly from a Gaussian or uniform distribution. The c hoice of Gaussian or uniform distribution do es not seem to matter muc h but has not b een exhaustively studied. The scale of the initial distribution, how ev er, do es ha v e a large eﬀect on b oth the outcome of the optimization pro cedure and the ability of the net w ork to generalize. Larger initial weigh ts will yield a stronger symmetry-breaking eﬀect, helping to av oid redundant units. They also help to av oid losing signal during forward or bac k-propagation through the linear comp onent of eac h lay er—larger v alues in the matrix result in larger outputs of matrix m ultiplication. Initial w eigh ts that are to o large ma y , how ever, result in explo ding v alues during forward propagation or bac k-propagation. In recurrent net works, large w eights can also result in c haos (suc h extreme sensitivity to small p erturbations of the input that the b eha vior of the deterministic forward propagation pro cedure app ears random). T o some exten t, the explo ding gradient problem can b e mitigated by gradient clipping (thresholding the v alues of the gradients b efore p erforming a gradien t descent step). Large weigh ts may also result in extreme v alues that cause the activ ation function to saturate, causing complete loss of gradient through saturated units. These comp eting factors determine the ideal initial scale of the weigh ts. The p ersp ectiv es of regularization and optimization can giv e v ery diﬀeren t 298 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS insigh ts in to ho w we should initialize a netw ork. The optimization p ersp ective suggests that the weigh ts should b e large enough to propagate information suc- cessfully , but some regularization concerns encourage making them smaller. The use of an optimization algorithm, such as sto c hastic gradient descen t, that makes small incremen tal changes to the weigh ts and tends to halt in areas that are nearer to the initial parameters (whether due to getting stuck in a region of low gradien t, or due to triggering some early stopping criterion based on ov erﬁtting) expresses a prior that the ﬁnal parameters should b e close to the initial parameters. Recall from section 7.8 that gradient descen t with early stopping is equiv alent to weigh t deca y for some mo dels. In the general case, gradient descen t with early stopping is not the same as w eigh t decay , but it do es pro vide a lo ose analogy for thinking ab out the eﬀect of initialization. W e can think of initializing the parameters θ to θ 0 as b eing similar to imp osing a Gaussian prior p ( θ ) with mean θ 0 . F rom this p oin t of view, it mak es sense to choose θ 0 to b e near 0. This prior says that it is more likely that units do not in teract with eac h other than that they do interact. Units interact only if the likelihoo d term of the ob jectiv e function expresses a strong preference for them to interact. On the other hand, if we initialize θ 0 to large v alues, then our prior sp eciﬁes which units should interact with each other, and how they should interact. Some heuristics are av ailable for c ho osing the initial scale of the weigh ts. One heuristic is to initialize the w eigh ts of a fully connected la yer with m inputs and n outputs by sampling each weigh t from U ( − 1 √ m , 1 √ m ) , while Glorot and Bengio ( 2010 ) suggest using the normalized initialization W i,j ∼ U  −  6 m + n ,  6 m + n  . (8.23) This latter heuristic is designed to compromise b et w een the goal of initializing all lay ers to ha ve the same activ ation v ariance and the goal of initializing all la y ers to hav e the same gradien t v ariance. The formula is deriv ed using the assumption that the net work consists only of a c hain of matrix m ultiplications, with no nonlinearities. Real neural netw orks ob viously violate this assumption, but many strategies designed for the linear mo del p erform reasonably well on its nonlinear counterparts. Saxe et al. ( 2013 ) recommend initializing to random orthogonal matrices, with a carefully c hosen scaling or gain factor g that accoun ts for the nonlinearity applied at each lay er. They deriv e sp eciﬁc v alues of the scaling factor for diﬀerent t yp es of nonlinear activ ation functions. This initialization sc heme is also motiv ated by a mo del of a deep net w ork as a sequence of matrix multiplies without nonlinearities. 299 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS Under suc h a mo del, this initialization sc heme guaran tees that the total num b er of training iterations required to reac h conv ergence is indep endent of depth. Increasing the scaling factor g pushes the net work to ward the regime where activ ations increase in norm as they propagate forw ard through the netw ork and gradien ts increase in norm as they propagate backw ard. Sussillo ( 2014 ) show ed that setting the gain factor correctly is suﬃcien t to train net w orks as deep as 1,000 lay ers, without needing to use orthogonal initializations. A k ey insight of this approach is that in feedforw ard netw orks, activ ations and gradien ts can grow or shrink on eac h step of forward or bac k-propagation, following a random w alk b eha vior. This is b ecause feedforw ard netw orks use a diﬀerent w eigh t matrix at each la y er. If this random walk is tuned to preserv e norms, then feedforw ard netw orks can mostly a v oid the v anishing and explo ding gradients problem that arises when the same w eigh t matrix is used at each step, as describ ed in section 8.2.5 . Unfortunately , these optimal criteria for initial weigh ts often do not lead to optimal p erformance. This may b e for three diﬀeren t reasons. First, we may b e using the wrong criteria—it may not actually b e b eneﬁcial to preserve the norm of a signal throughout the entire net w ork. Second, the prop erties imp osed at initialization may not p ersist after learning has b egun to pro ceed. Third, the criteria might succeed at improving the sp eed of optimization but inadverten tly increase generalization error. In practice, we usually need to treat the scale of the w eigh ts as a hyperparameter whose optimal v alue lies somewhere roughly near but not exactly equal to the theoretical predictions. One drawbac k to scaling rules that set all the initial weigh ts to ha ve the same standard deviation, such as 1 √ m , is that every individual weigh t b ecomes extremely small when the lay ers b ecome large. Martens ( 2010 ) introduced an alternative initialization sc heme called sparse initialization , in whic h each unit is initialized to hav e exactly k nonzero weigh ts. The idea is to keep the total amount of input to the unit indep endent from the num b er of inputs m without making the magnitude of individual weigh t elements shrink with m . Sparse initialization helps to achiev e more diversit y among the units at initialization time. Ho wev er, it also imp oses a very strong prior on the weigh ts that are chosen to ha ve large Gaussian v alues. Because it takes a long time for gradien t descen t to shrink “incorrect” large v alues, this initialization scheme can cause problems for units, such as maxout units, that ha v e several ﬁlters that m ust b e carefully co ordinated with each other. When computational resources allo w it, it is usually a go o d idea to treat the initial scale of the w eights for each lay er as a hyperparameter, and to choose these scales using a h yp erparameter search algorithm describ ed in section 11.4.2 , such as random search. The choice of whether to use dense or sparse initialization 300 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS can also b e made a h yp erparameter. Alternately , one can man ually search for the b est initial scales. A go o d rule of thum b for choosing the initial scales is to lo ok at the range or standard deviation of activ ations or gradients on a single minibatc h of data. If the weigh ts are to o small, the range of activ ations across the minibatc h will shrink as the activ ations propagate forward through the netw ork. By rep eatedly identifying the ﬁrst lay er with unacceptably small activ ations and increasing its weigh ts, it is p ossible to even tually obtain a net w ork with reasonable initial activ ations throughout. If learning is still to o slow at this p oint, it can b e useful to lo ok at the range or standard deviation of the gradien ts as well as the activ ations. This pro cedure can in principle b e automated and is generally less computationally costly than hyperparameter optimization based on v alidation set error b ecause it is based on feedback from the b ehavior of the initial mo del on a single batc h of data, rather than on feedback from a trained mo del on the v alidation set. While long used heuristically , this proto col has recently b een sp eciﬁed more formally and studied by Mishkin and Matas ( 2015 ). So far w e ha v e focused on the initialization of the w eights. F ortunately , initialization of other parameters is typically easier. The approac h for setting the biases m ust b e co ordinated with the approac h for setting the weigh ts. Setting the biases to zero is compatible with most weigh t initialization schemes. There are a few situations where we ma y set some biases to nonzero v alues: • If a bias is for an output unit, then it is often b eneﬁcial to initialize the bias to obtain the righ t marginal statistics of the output. T o do this, w e assume that the initial w eigh ts are small enough that the output of the unit is determined only b y the bias. This justiﬁes setting the bias to the in v erse of the activ ation function applied to the marginal statistics of the output in the training set. F or example, if the output is a distribution ov er classes, and this distribution is a highly sk ew ed distribution with the marginal probability of class i giv en b y element c i of some v ector c , then w e can set the bias v ector b b y solving the equation softmax ( b ) = c . This applies not only to classiﬁers but also to mo dels we will encounter in Part I I I , such as auto enco ders and Boltzmann mac hines. These mo dels hav e la y ers whose output should resem ble the input data x , and it can b e v ery helpful to initialize the biases of such la y ers to matc h the marginal distribution o v er x . • Sometimes w e ma y w an t to c ho ose the bias to av oid causing to o muc h saturation at initialization. F or example, w e ma y set the bias of a ReLU hidden unit to 0.1 rather than 0 to av oid saturating the ReLU at initialization. This approach is not compatible with weigh t initialization schemes that do 301 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS not exp ect strong input from the biases though. F or example, it is not recommended for use with random walk initialization ( Sussillo , 2014 ). • Sometimes a unit controls whether other units are able to participate in a function. In suc h situations, w e hav e a unit with output u and another unit h ∈ [0 , 1] , and they are multiplied together to pro duce an output uh . W e can view h as a gate that determines whether uh ≈ u or uh ≈ 0 . In these situations, we wan t to set the bias for h so that h ≈ 1 most of the time at initialization. Otherwise u do es not hav e a chance to learn. F or example, Jozefo wicz et al. ( 2015 ) adv o cate setting the bias to 1 for the forget gate of the LSTM mo del, describ ed in section 10.10 . Another common t yp e of parameter is a v ariance or precision parameter. F or example, we can perform linear regression with a conditional v ariance estimate using the mo del p ( y | x ) = N ( y | w T x + b, 1 /β ) , (8.24) where β is a precision parameter. W e can usually initialize v ariance or precision parameters to 1 safely . Another approach is to assume the initial weigh ts are close enough to zero that the biases may b e set while ignoring the eﬀect of the weigh ts, then set the biases to pro duce the correct marginal mean of the output, and set the v ariance parameters to the marginal v ariance of the output in the training set. Besides these simple constant or random metho ds of initializing mo del parame- ters, it is p ossible to initialize mo del parameters using mach ine learning. A common strategy discussed in part I I I of this b o ok is to initialize a sup ervised mo del with the parameters learned by an unsup ervised mo del trained on the same inputs. One can also p erform sup ervised training on a related task. Even p erforming sup ervised training on an unrelated task can sometimes yield an initialization that oﬀers faster conv ergence than a random initialization. Some of these initialization strategies may yield faster conv ergence and b etter generalization b ecause they enco de information ab out the distribution in the initial parameters of the mo del. Others apparently p erform we ll primarily b ecause they set the parameters to hav e the righ t scale or set diﬀeren t units to compute diﬀerent functions from eac h other. 8.5 Algorithms with A daptiv e Learning Rates Neural net w ork researc hers ha v e long realized that the learning rate is reliably one of the most diﬃcult to set hyperparameters b ecause it signiﬁcantly aﬀects mo del p erformance. As we discuss in sections 4.3 and 8.2 , the cost is often highly 302 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS sensitiv e to some directions in parameter space and insensitiv e to others. The momen tum algorithm can mitigate these issues somewhat, but it do es so at the exp ense of introducing another h yp erparameter. In the face of this, it is natural to ask if there is another wa y . If we b eliev e that the directions of sensitivity are somewhat axis aligned, it can make sense to use a separate learning rate for eac h parameter and automatically adapt these learning rates throughout the course of learning. The delta-bar-delta algorithm ( Jacobs , 1988 ) is an early heuristic approach to adapting individual learning rates for mo del parameters during training. The approac h is based on a simple idea: if the partial deriv ativ e of the loss, with resp ect to a given model parameter, remains the same sign, then the learning rate should increase. If that partial deriv ative c hanges sign, then the learning rate should decrease. Of course, this kind of rule can only b e applied to full batch optimization. More recently , a num b er of incremental (or mini batch-based) metho ds hav e b een in tro duced that adapt the learning rates of mo del parameters. In this section, w e brieﬂy review a few of these algorithms. 8.5.1 A daGrad The A daGrad algorithm, shown in algorithm 8.4 , individually adapts the learning rates of all mo del parameters by scaling them in v ersely prop ortional to the square ro ot of the sum of all the historical squared v alues of the gradient ( Duc hi et al. , 2011 ). The parameters with the largest partial deriv ative of the loss ha ve a corresp ondingly rapid decrease in their learning rate, while parameters with small partial deriv atives ha v e a relatively small decrease in their learning rate. The net eﬀect is greater progress in the more gently slop ed directions of parameter space. In the context of conv ex optimization, the A daGrad algorithm enjoys some desirable theoretical prop erties. Empirically , ho w ev er, for training deep neural net w ork mo dels, the accumulation of squared gradients fr om the b e ginning of tr aining can result in a premature and excessiv e decrease in the eﬀective learning rate. AdaGrad p erforms well for some but not all deep learning mo dels. 8.5.2 RMSProp The RMSProp algorithm ( Hinton , 2012 ) mo diﬁes AdaGrad to p erform b etter in the nonconv ex setting by changing the gradient accumulation in to an exp onen tially w eigh ted moving a v erage. AdaGrad is designed to conv erge rapidly when applied to a conv ex function. When applied to a noncon v ex function to train a neural netw ork, 303 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS the learning tra jectory may pass through many diﬀerent structures and ev entually arriv e at a region that is a lo cally con v ex b owl. AdaGrad shrinks the learning rate according to the en tire history of the squared gradient and may hav e made the learning rate to o small b efore arriving at such a conv ex structure. RMSProp uses an exponentially decaying av erage to discard history from the extreme past so that it can conv erge rapidly after ﬁnding a con vex b o wl, as if it w ere an instance of the A daGrad algorithm initialized within that b owl. Algorithm 8.4 The A daGrad algorithm Require: Global learning rate  Require: Initial parameter θ Require: Small constant δ , p erhaps 10 − 7 , for n umerical stability Initialize gradient accum ulation v ariable r = 0 while stopping criterion not met do Sample a minibatch of m examples from the training set { x (1) , . . . , x ( m ) } with corresp onding targets y ( i ) . Compute gradient: g ← 1 m ∇ θ  i L ( f ( x ( i ) ; θ ) , y ( i ) ) . A ccum ulate squared gradien t: r ← r + g  g . Compute up date: ∆ θ ← −  δ + √ r  g . (Division and square ro ot applied elemen t-wise) Apply up date: θ ← θ + ∆ θ . end while Algorithm 8.5 The RMSProp algorithm Require: Global learning rate  , decay rate ρ Require: Initial parameter θ Require: Small constan t δ , usually 10 − 6 , used to stabilize division by small n um b ers Initialize accumulation v ariables r = 0 while stopping criterion not met do Sample a minibatch of m examples from the training set { x (1) , . . . , x ( m ) } with corresp onding targets y ( i ) . Compute gradient: g ← 1 m ∇ θ  i L ( f ( x ( i ) ; θ ) , y ( i ) ) . A ccum ulate squared gradien t: r ← ρ r + (1 − ρ ) g  g . Compute parameter up date: ∆ θ = −  √ δ + r  g . ( 1 √ δ + r applied element-wise) Apply up date: θ ← θ + ∆ θ . end while 304 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS RMSProp is shown in its standard form in algorithm 8.5 and combined with Nestero v momentum in algorithm 8.6 . Compared to AdaGrad, the use of the mo ving a verage introduces a new h yp erparameter, ρ , that controls the length scale of the mo ving av erage. Empirically , RMSProp has b een shown to b e an eﬀectiv e and practical op- timization algorithm for deep neural net wor ks. It is currently one of the go-to optimization metho ds b eing employ ed routinely by deep learning practitioners. 8.5.3 A dam A dam ( Kingma and Ba , 2014 ) is yet another adaptive learning rate optimization algorithm and is presented in algorithm 8.7 . The name “Adam” deriv es from the phrase “adaptive moments.” In the context of the earlier algorithms, it is p erhaps b est seen as a v arian t on the com bination of RMSProp and momentum with a few important distinctions. First, in Adam, momen tum is incorp orated directly as an estimate of the ﬁrst-order moment (with exp onen tial weigh ting) of the gradient. The most straightforw ard wa y to add momentum to RMSProp is to apply momentum to the rescaled gradien ts. The use of momen tum in combination with rescaling do es not hav e a clear theoretical motiv ation. Second, Adam includes bias corrections to the estimates of b oth the ﬁrst-order moments (the momentum term) and the (uncentered) second-order momen ts to accoun t for their initialization at the origin (see algorithm 8.7 ). RMSProp also incorp orates an estimate of the Algorithm 8.6 RMSProp algorithm with Nestero v momentum Require: Global learning rate  , decay rate ρ , momentum co eﬃcient α Require: Initial parameter θ , initial velocity v Initialize accumulation v ariable r = 0 while stopping criterion not met do Sample a minibatch of m examples from the training set { x (1) , . . . , x ( m ) } with corresp onding targets y ( i ) . Compute interim up date: ˜ θ ← θ + α v . Compute gradient: g ← 1 m ∇ ˜ θ  i L ( f ( x ( i ) ; ˜ θ ) , y ( i ) ) . A ccum ulate gradient: r ← ρ r + (1 − ρ ) g  g . Compute velocity up date: v ← α v −  √ r  g . ( 1 √ r applied element-wise) Apply up date: θ ← θ + v . end while 305 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS (uncen tered) second-order moment; ho w ev er, it lacks the correction factor. Th us, unlik e in Adam, the RMSProp second-order momen t estimate may hav e high bias early in training. A dam is generally regarded as b eing fairly robust to the choice of hyperparameters, though the learning rate sometimes needs to b e c hanged from the suggested default. 8.5.4 Cho osing the Righ t Optimization Algorithm W e hav e discussed a series of related algorithms that eac h seek to address the c hallenge of optimizing deep mo dels by adapting the learning rate for eac h mo del parameter. A t this p oint, a natural question is: whic h algorithm should one choose? Unfortunately , there is currently no consensus on this p oint. Schaul et al. ( 2014 ) presen ted a v aluable comparison of a large num b er of optimization algorithms across a wide range of learning tasks. While the results suggest that the family of algorithms with adaptive learning rates (represen ted by RMSProp and AdaDelta) Algorithm 8.7 The A dam algorithm Require: Step size  (Suggested default: 0 . 001 ) Require: Exp onen tial deca y rates for momen t estimates, ρ 1 and ρ 2 in [0 , 1) . (Suggested defaults: 0 . 9 and 0 . 999 resp ectiv ely) Require: Small constant δ used for numerical stabilization (Suggested default: 10 − 8 ) Require: Initial parameters θ Initialize 1st and 2nd momen t v ariables s = 0 , r = 0 Initialize time step t = 0 while stopping criterion not met do Sample a minibatch of m examples from the training set { x (1) , . . . , x ( m ) } with corresp onding targets y ( i ) . Compute gradient: g ← 1 m ∇ θ  i L ( f ( x ( i ) ; θ ) , y ( i ) ) t ← t + 1 Up date biased ﬁrst moment estimate: s ← ρ 1 s + (1 − ρ 1 ) g Up date biased second moment estimate: r ← ρ 2 r + (1 − ρ 2 ) g  g Correct bias in ﬁrst momen t: ˆ s ← s 1 − ρ t 1 Correct bias in second momen t: ˆ r ← r 1 − ρ t 2 Compute up date: ∆ θ = −  ˆ s √ ˆ r + δ (op erations applied elemen t-wise) Apply up date: θ ← θ + ∆ θ end while 306 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS p erformed fairly robustly , no single b est algorithm has emerged. Curren tly , the most p opular optimization algorithms activ ely in use include SGD, SGD with momentum, RMSProp, RMSProp with momen tum, A daDelta, and Adam. The choice of which algorithm to use, at this p oin t, seems to dep end largely on the user’s familiarity with the algorithm (for ease of hyperparameter tuning). 8.6 Appro ximate Second-Order Metho ds In this section we discuss the application of second-order metho ds to training deep net w orks. See LeCun et al. ( 1998a ) for an earlier treatment of this sub ject. F or simplicit y of exp osition, the only ob jective function w e examine is the empirical risk: J ( θ ) = E x , y ∼ ˆ p data ( x ,y ) [ L ( f ( x ; θ ) , y )] = 1 m m  i =1 L ( f ( x ( i ) ; θ ) , y ( i ) ) . (8.25) The metho ds we discuss here extend readily , how ever, to more general ob jective functions, such as those that include parameter regularization terms, as discussed in chapter 7 . 8.6.1 Newton’s Metho d In section 4.3 , we in tro duced second-order gradien t metho ds. In contrast to ﬁrst- order metho ds, second-order metho ds make use of second deriv atives to improv e optimization. The most widely used second-order metho d is Newton’s metho d. W e no w describ e Newton’s metho d in more detail, with emphasis on its application to neural netw ork training. Newton’s metho d is an optimization sc heme based on using a second-order T a y- lor series expansion to approximate J ( θ ) near some p oint θ 0 , ignoring deriv atives of higher order: J ( θ ) ≈ J ( θ 0 ) + ( θ − θ 0 )  ∇ θ J ( θ 0 ) + 1 2 ( θ − θ 0 )  H ( θ − θ 0 ) , (8.26) where H is the Hessian of J with respect to θ ev aluated at θ 0 . If we then solv e for the critical p oin t of this function, w e obtain the Newton parameter up date rule: θ ∗ = θ 0 − H − 1 ∇ θ J ( θ 0 ) . (8.27) 307 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS Th us for a lo cally quadratic function (with positive deﬁnite H ), b y rescaling the gradien t by H − 1 , Newton’s metho d jumps directly to the minimum. If the ob jectiv e function is con v ex but not quadratic (there are higher-order terms), this up date can b e iterated, yielding the training algorithm asso ciated with Newton’s metho d, given in algorithm 8.8 . F or surfaces that are not quadratic, as long as the Hessian remains p ositive deﬁnite, Newton’s metho d can b e applied iteratively . This implies a tw o-step iterativ e pro cedure. First, up date or compute the inv erse Hessian (i.e., by up dat- ing the quadratic approximation). Second, up date the parameters according to equation 8.27 . In section 8.2.3 , we discuss how Newton’s method is appropriate only when the Hessian is p ositive deﬁnite. In deep learning, the surface of the ob jective function is typically nonconv ex, with many features, suc h as saddle p oints, that are problematic for Newton’s metho d. If the eigen v alues of the Hessian are not all p ositive, for example, near a saddle p oint, then Newton’s metho d can actually cause up dates to mov e in the wrong direction. This situation can b e av oided b y regularizing the Hessian. Common regularization strategies include adding a constan t, α , along the diagonal of the Hessian. The regularized up date b ecomes θ ∗ = θ 0 − [ H ( f ( θ 0 )) + α I ] − 1 ∇ θ f ( θ 0 ) . (8.28) This regularization strategy is used in approximations to Newton’s metho d, suc h as the Lev en b erg-Marquardt algorithm ( Lev enberg , 1944 ; Marquardt , 1963 ), and w orks fairly well as long as the negative eigen v alues of the Hessian are still relatively close to zero. When there are more extreme directions of curv ature, the v alue of α w ould ha v e to b e suﬃciently large to oﬀset the negativ e eigen v alues. As α increases in size, ho w ever, the Hessian b ecomes dominated by the α I diagonal, Algorithm 8.8 Newton’s metho d with ob jective J ( θ ) = 1 m  m i =1 L ( f ( x ( i ) ; θ ) , y ( i ) ) Require: Initial parameter θ 0 Require: T raining set of m examples while stopping criterion not met do Compute gradient: g ← 1 m ∇ θ  i L ( f ( x ( i ) ; θ ) , y ( i ) ) Compute Hessian: H ← 1 m ∇ 2 θ  i L ( f ( x ( i ) ; θ ) , y ( i ) ) Compute Hessian in v erse: H − 1 Compute up date: ∆ θ = − H − 1 g Apply up date: θ = θ + ∆ θ end while 308 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS and the direction chosen b y Newton’s metho d conv erges to the standard gradient divided by α . When strong negative curv ature is present, α ma y need to b e so large that Newton’s metho d w ould make smaller steps than gradien t descent with a prop erly c hosen learning rate. Bey ond the challenges created by certain features of the ob jective function, suc h as saddle p oin ts, the application of Newton’s metho d for training large neural net w orks is limited b y the signiﬁcan t computational burden it imposes. The n um b er of elemen ts in the Hessian is squared in the num b er of parameters, so with k parameters (and for ev en very small neural netw orks, the n um b er of parameters k can b e in the millions), Newton’s metho d would require the inv ersion of a k × k matrix—with computational complexit y of O ( k 3 ) . Also, since the parameters will c hange with every up date, the in v erse Hessian has to b e computed at every tr aining iter ation . As a consequence, only netw orks with a very small num b er of parameters can b e practically trained via Newton’s metho d. In the remainder of this section, w e discuss alternatives that attempt to gain some of the adv an tages of Newton’s metho d while side-stepping the computational hurdles. 8.6.2 Conjugate Gradien ts Conjugate gradients is a metho d to eﬃcien tly av oid the calculation of the inv erse Hessian by iteratively descending conjugate directions . The inspiration for this approac h follows from a careful study of the weakness of the metho d of steep est descen t (see section 4.3 for details), where line searches are applied iteratively in the direction asso ciated with the gradient. Figure 8.6 illustrates how the metho d of steep est descen t, when applied in a quadratic b o wl, progresses in a rather ineﬀectiv e bac k-and-forth zig-zag pattern. This happ ens b ecause each line search direction, when given b y the gradient, is guaranteed to b e orthogonal to the previous line searc h direction. Let the previous searc h direction b e d t − 1 . A t the minimum, where the line searc h terminates, the directional deriv ative is zero in direction d t − 1 : ∇ θ J ( θ ) · d t − 1 = 0 . Since the gradient at this p oin t deﬁnes the current search direction, d t = ∇ θ J ( θ ) will hav e no contribution in the direction d t − 1 . Thus d t is orthogonal to d t − 1 . This relationship b etw een d t − 1 and d t is illustrated in ﬁgure 8.6 for m ultiple iterations of steep est descen t. As demonstrated in the ﬁgure, the c hoice of orthogonal directions of descent do not preserve the minimum along the previous searc h directions. This giv es rise to the zig-zag pattern of progress, where by descending to the minim um in the curren t gradien t direction, we m ust reminimize the ob jectiv e in the previous gradient direction. Thus, b y follo wing the gradient at the end of each line searc h we are, in a sense, undoing progress we ha v e already 309 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS 󰤓 󰤓 󰤓    󰤓 󰤓 󰤓    Figure 8.6: The metho d of steep est descen t applied to a quadratic cost surface. The metho d of steep est descent in volv es jumping to the p oint of low est cost along the line deﬁned by the gradient at the initial p oint on eac h step. This resolv es some of the problems seen with using a ﬁxed learning rate in ﬁgure 4.6 , but even with the optimal step size the algorithm still makes back-and-forth progress tow ard the optimum. By deﬁnition, at the minimum of the ob jectiv e along a given direction, the gradient at the ﬁnal p oint is orthogonal to that direction. made in the direction of the previous line search. The metho d of conjugate gradients seeks to address this problem. In the metho d of conjugate gradients, w e seek to ﬁnd a searc h direction that is conjugate to the previous line search direction; that is, it will not undo progress made in that direction. A t training iteration t , the next search direction d t tak es the form: d t = ∇ θ J ( θ ) + β t d t − 1 , (8.29) where β t is a co eﬃcient whose magnitude controls how m uch of the direction, d t − 1 , w e should add back to the curren t search direction. T w o directions, d t and d t − 1 , are deﬁned as conjugate if d  t H d t − 1 = 0 , where H is the Hessian matrix. The straightforw ard wa y to imp ose conjugacy would in vo lve calculation of the eigen v ectors of H to choose β t , whic h would not satisfy our goal of developing a metho d that is more computationally viable than Newton’s metho d for large problems. Can we calculate the conjugate directions without resorting to these calculations? F ortunately , the answer to that is yes. T w o p opular metho ds for computing the β t are 310 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS 1. Fletc her-Reev es: β t = ∇ θ J ( θ t )  ∇ θ J ( θ t ) ∇ θ J ( θ t − 1 )  ∇ θ J ( θ t − 1 ) (8.30) 2. P olak-Ribière: β t = ( ∇ θ J ( θ t ) − ∇ θ J ( θ t − 1 ))  ∇ θ J ( θ t ) ∇ θ J ( θ t − 1 )  ∇ θ J ( θ t − 1 ) (8.31) F or a quadratic surface, the conjugate directions ensure that the gradient along the previous direction do es not increase in magnitude. W e therefore stay at the minim um along the previous directions. As a consequence, in a k -dimensional parameter space, the conjugate gradien t metho d requires at most k line searches to ac hiev e the minimum. The conjugate gradient algorithm is given in algorithm 8.9 . Algorithm 8.9 The conjugate gradient metho d Require: Initial parameters θ 0 Require: T raining set of m examples Initialize ρ 0 = 0 Initialize g 0 = 0 Initialize t = 1 while stopping criterion not met do Initialize the gradien t g t = 0 Compute gradient: g t ← 1 m ∇ θ  i L ( f ( x ( i ) ; θ ) , y ( i ) ) Compute β t = ( g t − g t − 1 )  g t g  t − 1 g t − 1 (P olak-Ribière) (Nonlinear conjugate gradien t: optionally reset β t to zero, for example if t is a multiple of some constant k , suc h as k = 5 ) Compute search direction: ρ t = − g t + β t ρ t − 1 P erform line searc h to ﬁnd:  ∗ = argmin  1 m  m i =1 L ( f ( x ( i ) ; θ t +  ρ t ) , y ( i ) ) (On a truly quadratic cost function, analytically solve for  ∗ rather than explicitly searching for it) Apply up date: θ t +1 = θ t +  ∗ ρ t t ← t + 1 end while Nonlinear Conjugate Gradien ts: So far w e hav e discussed the metho d of conjugate gradien ts as it is applied to quadratic ob jectiv e functions. Of course, our primary interest in this chapter is to explore optimization metho ds for training neural netw orks and other related deep learning mo dels where the corresp onding 311 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS ob jectiv e function is far from quadratic. Perhaps surprisingly , the metho d of conjugate gradien ts is still applicable in this setting, though with some mo diﬁcation. Without any assurance that the ob jectiv e is quadratic, the conjugate directions are no longer assured to remain at the minimum of the ob jectiv e for previous directions. As a result, the nonlinear conjugate gradients algorithm includes o ccasional resets where the metho d of conjugate gradien ts is restarted with line searc h along the unaltered gradien t. Practitioners report reasonable results in applications of the nonlinear conjugate gradien ts algorithm to training neural netw orks, though it is often b eneﬁcial to initialize the optimization with a few iterations of sto chastic gradient descen t b efore commencing nonlinear conjugate gradients. Also, while the (nonlinear) conjugate gradien ts algorithm has traditionally b een cast as a batch metho d, minibatc h v ersions hav e b een used successfully for training neural netw orks ( Le et al. , 2011 ). A daptations of conjugate gradients sp eciﬁcally for neural netw orks hav e b een prop osed earlier, suc h as the scaled conjugate gradients algorithm ( Moller , 1993 ). 8.6.3 BF GS The Bro yden–Fletc her–Goldfarb–Shanno (BFGS) algorithm attempts to bring some of the adv antages of Newton’s metho d without the computational burden. In that respect, BFGS is similar to the conjugate gradient method. Ho w ev er, BFGS tak es a more direct approach to the approximation of Newton’s up date. Recall that Newton’s up date is given by θ ∗ = θ 0 − H − 1 ∇ θ J ( θ 0 ) , (8.32) where H is the Hessian of J with resp ect to θ ev aluated at θ 0 . The primary computational diﬃcult y in applying Newton’s up date is the calculation of the in v erse Hessian H − 1 . The approac h adopted b y quasi-Newton metho ds (of which the BFGS algorithm is the most prominen t) is to approximate the in v erse with a matrix M t that is iterativ ely reﬁned b y lo w-rank up dates to b ecome a b etter appro ximation of H − 1 . The sp eciﬁcation and deriv ation of the BFGS appro ximation is giv en in many textb o oks on optimization, including in Luenberger ( 1984 ). Once the in v erse Hessian approximation M t is up dated, the direction of descent ρ t is determined by ρ t = M t g t . A line search is p erformed in this direction to determine the size of the step,  ∗ , taken in this direction. The ﬁnal up date to the parameters is giv en by θ t +1 = θ t +  ∗ ρ t . (8.33) 312 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS Lik e the metho d of conjugate gradients, the BFGS algorithm iterates a series of line searc hes with the direction incorp orating second-order information. Unlik e conjugate gradients, how ev er, the success of the approach is not heavily dep enden t on the line search ﬁnding a p oint v ery close to the true minimum along the line. Th us, relative to conjugate gradien ts, BFGS has the adv an tage that it can sp end less time reﬁning each line search. On the other hand, the BFGS algorithm must store the inv erse Hessian matrix, M , that requires O ( n 2 ) memory , making BFGS impractical for most mo dern deep learning mo dels that typically ha v e millions of parameters. Limited Memory BF GS (or L-BF GS) The memory costs of the BF GS algorithm can b e signiﬁcantly decreased by a v oiding storing the complete inv erse Hessian approximation M . The L-BFGS algorithm computes the appro ximation M using the same metho d as the BF GS algorithm but b eginning with the assumption that M ( t − 1) is the iden tit y matrix, rather than storing the approximation from one step to the next. If used with exact line searches, the directions deﬁned by L-BFGS are mutually conjugate. Ho w ev er, unlike the metho d of conjugate gradients, this pro cedure remains well b eha ved when the minimum of the line searc h is reac hed only approximately . The L-BFGS strategy with no storage describ ed here can b e generalized to include more information ab out the Hessian by storing some of the v ectors used to up date M at each time step, which costs only O ( n ) p er step. 8.7 Optimization Strategies and Meta-Algorithms Man y optimization tec hniques are not exactly algorithms but rather general tem- plates that can b e sp ecialized to yield algorithms, or subroutines that can b e incorp orated into man y diﬀerent algorithms. 8.7.1 Batc h Normalization Batc h normalization ( Ioﬀe and Szegedy , 2015 ) is one of the most exciting recent inno v ations in optimizing deep neural netw orks, and it is actually not an opti- mization algorithm at all. Instead, it is a metho d of adaptive reparametrization, motiv ated by the diﬃculty of training very deep mo dels. V ery deep mo dels inv olve the comp osition of sev eral functions, or lay ers. The gradien t tells how to up date each parameter, under the assumption that the other la y ers do not change. In practice, we up date all the la y ers simultaneously . When we mak e the up date, unexp ected results can happ en b ecause man y functions comp osed 313 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS together are changed simultaneously , using up dates that were computed under the assumption that the other functions remain constant. As a simple example, supp ose we ha v e a deep neural netw ork that has only one unit p er lay er and do es not use an activ ation function at each hidden la y er: ˆ y = xw 1 w 2 w 3 . . . w l . Here, w i pro vides the weigh t used by la y er i . The output of lay er i is h i = h i − 1 w i . The output ˆ y is a linear function of the input x but a nonlinear function of the weigh ts w i . Suppose our cost function has put a gradient of 1 on ˆ y , so w e wish to decrease ˆ y sligh tly . The back-propagation algorithm can then compute a gradien t g = ∇ w ˆ y . Consider what happ ens when we make an up date w ← w −  g . The ﬁrst-order T a ylor series appro ximation of ˆ y predicts that the v alue of ˆ y will decrease b y  g  g . If we wan ted to decrease ˆ y b y 0 . 1 , this ﬁrst-order information av ailable in the gradien t suggests w e could set the learning rate  to 0 . 1 g  g . Y et, the actual up date will include second-order and third-order eﬀects, on up to eﬀects of order l . The new v alue of ˆ y is giv en by x ( w 1 − g 1 )( w 2 − g 2 ) . . . ( w l − g l ) . (8.34) An example of one second-order term arising from this up date is  2 g 1 g 2  l i =3 w i . This term migh t b e negligible if  l i =3 w i is small, or might b e exp onen tially large if the weigh ts on lay ers 3 through l are greater than 1 . This mak es it v ery hard to choose an appropriate learning rate, b ecause the eﬀects of an up date to the parameters for one lay er dep end so strongly on all the other lay ers. Second-order optimization algorithms address this issue b y computing an up date that tak es these second-order interactions into accoun t, but we can see that in very deep net w orks, ev en higher-order interactions can b e signiﬁcan t. Ev en second-order optimization algorithms are exp ensive and usually require n umerous approximations that preven t them from truly accounting for all signiﬁcant second-order interactions. Building an n -th order optimization algorithm for n > 2 thus seems hop eless. What can we do instead? Batc h normalization provides an elegant wa y of reparametrizing almost any deep net w ork. The reparametrization signiﬁcantly reduces the problem of co ordinating up dates across man y lay ers. Batch normalization can b e applied to any input or hidden la y er in a netw ork. Let H b e a minibatc h of activ ations of the lay er to normalize, arranged as a design matrix, with the activ ations for eac h example app earing in a row of the matrix. T o normalize H , we replace it with H  = H − µ σ , (8.35) where µ is a vector con taining the mean of each unit and σ is a vector con taining the standard deviation of eac h unit. The arithmetic here is based on broadcasting 314 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS the v ector µ and the v ector σ to b e applied to every row of the matrix H . Within eac h row, the arithmetic is elemen t-wise, so H i,j is normalized by subtracting µ j and dividing by σ j . The rest of the netw ork then op erates on H  in exactly the same wa y that the original netw ork op erated on H . A t training time, µ = 1 m  i H i, : (8.36) and σ =  δ + 1 m  i ( H − µ ) 2 i , (8.37) where δ is a small p ositive v alue suc h as 10 − 8 , imp osed to a void encoun tering the undeﬁned gradient of √ z at z = 0 . Crucially , we b ack-pr op agate thr ough these op er ations for computing the mean and the standard deviation, and for applying them to normalize H . This means that the gradient will never prop ose an operation that acts simply to increase the standard deviation or mean of h i ; the normalization op erations remov e the eﬀect of such an action and zero out its comp onent in the gradient. This w as a ma jor innov ation of the batch normalization approach. Previous approaches had inv olved adding p enalties to the cost function to encourage units to hav e normalized activ ation statistics or in v olv ed interv ening to renormalize unit statistics after each gradient descen t step. The former approach usually resulted in imp erfect normalization and the latter usually resulted in signiﬁcant wasted time, as the learning algorithm rep eatedly prop osed changing the mean and v ariance, and the normalization step rep eatedly undid this change. Batch normalization reparametrizes the mo del to make some units alwa ys b e standardized b y deﬁnition, deftly sidestepping b oth problems. A t test time, µ and σ ma y be replaced by running a v erages that were collected during training time. This allows the mo del to b e ev aluated on a single example, without needing to use deﬁnitions of µ and σ that dep end on an en tire minibatch. Revisiting the ˆ y = xw 1 w 2 . . . w l example, we see that we can mostly resolve the diﬃculties in learning this mo del by normalizing h l − 1 . Supp ose that x is drawn from a unit Gaussian. Then h l − 1 will also come from a Gaussian, b ecause the transformation from x to h l is linear. Ho wev er, h l − 1 will no longer hav e zero mean and unit v ariance. After applying batch normalization, we obtain the normalized ˆ h l − 1 that restores the zero mean and unit v ariance prop erties. F or almost an y up date to the lo w er lay ers, ˆ h l − 1 will remain a unit Gaussian. The output ˆ y ma y then b e learned as a simple linear function ˆ y = w l ˆ h l − 1 . Learning in this mo del is no w very simple b ecause the parameters at the low er la y ers do not hav e an eﬀect in most cases; their output is alwa ys renormalized to a unit Gaussian. In some 315 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS corner cases, the low er la y ers can ha v e an eﬀect. Changing one of the low er la yer w eigh ts to 0 can mak e the output b ecome degenerate, and changing the sign of one of the low er w eights can ﬂip the relationship b etw een ˆ h l − 1 and y . These situations are very rare. Without normalization, nearly ev ery up date would ha ve an extreme eﬀect on the statistics of h l − 1 . Batc h normalization has thus made this mo del signiﬁcan tly easier to learn. In this example, the ease of learning of course came at the cost of making the low er lay ers useless. In our linear example, the low er lay ers no longer ha v e an y harmful eﬀect, but they also no longer ha v e an y b eneﬁcial eﬀect. This is b ecause we hav e normalized out the ﬁrst- and second-order statistics, which is all that a linear netw ork can inﬂuence. In a deep neural netw ork with nonlinear activ ation functions, the lo w er la y ers can p erform nonlinear transformations of the data, so they remain useful. Batc h normalization acts to standardize only the mean and v ariance of each unit in order to stabilize learning, but it allows the relationships b etw een units and the nonlinear statistics of a single unit to change. Because the ﬁnal lay er of the net w ork is able to learn a linear transformation, w e ma y actually wish to remo v e all linear relationships b et w een units within a la y er. Indeed, this is the approac h taken b y Desjardins et al. ( 2015 ), who provided the inspiration for batch normalization. Unfortunately , eliminating all linear in teractions is muc h more exp ensive than standardizing the mean and standard deviation of eac h individual unit, and so far batc h normalization remains the most practical approach. Normalizing the mean and standard deviation of a unit can reduce the expressiv e p o w er of the neural net w ork con taining that unit. T o main tain the expressive p o w er of the netw ork, it is common to replace the batch of hidden unit activ ations H with γ H  + β rather than simply the normalized H  . The v ariables γ and β are learned parameters that allow the new v ariable to hav e an y mean and standard deviation. At ﬁrst glance, this may seem useless—wh y did w e set the mean to 0 , and then introduce a parameter that allo ws it to b e set back to an y arbitrary v alue β ? The answ er is that the new parametrization can represent the same family of functions of the input as the old parametrization, but the new parametrization has diﬀerent learning dynamics. In the old parametrization, the mean of H w as determined by a complicated interaction b et w een the parameters in the lay ers b elo w H . In the new parametrization, the mean of γ H  + β is determined solely b y β . The new parametrization is muc h easier to learn with gradient descent. Most neural netw ork lay ers tak e the form of φ ( X W + b ) , where φ is some ﬁxed nonlinear activ ation function such as the rectiﬁed linear transformation. It is natural to wonder whether we should apply batch normalization to the input X , or to the transformed v alue X W + b . Ioﬀe and Szegedy ( 2015 ) recommend 316 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS the latter. More sp eciﬁcally , X W + b should b e replaced by a normalized version of X W . The bias term should b e omitted because it b ecomes redundant with the β parameter applied by the batch normalization reparametrization. The input to a lay er is usually the output of a nonlinear activ ation function such as the rectiﬁed linear function in a previous lay er. The statistics of the input are th us more non-Gaussian and less amenable to standardization by linear op erations. In conv olutional netw orks, describ ed in chapter 9 , it is imp ortan t to apply the same normalizing µ and σ at every spatial lo cation within a feature map, so that the statistics of the feature map remain the same regardless of spatial lo cation. 8.7.2 Co ordinate Descent In some cases, it may b e p ossible to solve an optimization problem quickly b y breaking it into separate pieces. If we minimize f ( x ) with resp ect to a single v ariable x i , then minimize it with resp ect to another v ariable x j , and so on, rep eatedly cycling through all v ariables, we are guaran teed to arrive at a (lo cal) minim um. This practice is known as co ordinate descent , b ecause we optimize one co ordinate at a time. More generally , blo c k co ordinate descen t refers to minimizing with resp ect to a subset of the v ariables simultaneously . The term “co ordinate descent” is often used to refer to blo ck co ordinate descent as w ell as the strictly individual co ordinate descen t. Co ordinate descent makes the most sense when the diﬀerent v ariables in the optimization problem can b e clearly separated into groups that pla y relatively isolated roles, or when optimization with resp ect to one group of v ariables is signiﬁcan tly more eﬃcient than optimization with resp ect to all of the v ariables. F or example, consider the cost function J ( H , W ) =  i,j | H i,j | +  i,j  X − W  H  2 i,j . (8.38) This function describ es a learning problem called sparse co ding, where the goal is to ﬁnd a weigh t matrix W that can linearly deco de a matrix of activ ation v alues H to reconstruct the training set X . Most applications of sparse co ding also in v olv e w eigh t deca y or a constraint on the norms of the columns of W , to prev en t the pathological solution with extremely small H and large W . The function J is not conv ex. Ho w ev er, w e can divide the inputs to the training algorithm in to t wo sets: the dictionary parameters W and the code represen tations H . Minimizing the ob jectiv e function with resp ect to either one of these sets of v ariables is a conv ex problem. Block co ordinate descent th us gives 317 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS us an optimization strategy that allows us to use eﬃcient conv ex optimization algorithms, by alternating b etw een optimizing W with H ﬁxed, then optimizing H with W ﬁxed. Co ordinate descent is not a very go o d strategy when the v alue of one v ariable strongly inﬂuences the optimal v alue of another v ariable, as in the function f ( x ) = ( x 1 − x 2 ) 2 + α  x 2 1 + x 2 2  where α is a p ositive constan t. The ﬁrst term encourages the tw o v ariables to ha ve similar v alue, while the second term encourages them to b e near zero. The solution is to set b oth to zero. Newton’s metho d can solve the problem in a single step b ecause it is a p ositiv e deﬁnite quadratic problem. F or small α , how ever, co ordinate descen t will mak e very slow progress b ecause the ﬁrst term do es not allo w a single v ariable to b e c hanged to a v alue that diﬀers signiﬁcan tly from the current v alue of the other v ariable. 8.7.3 P oly ak A v eraging P oly ak av eraging ( Poly ak and Juditsky , 1992 ) consists of av eraging several p oin ts in the tra jectory through parameter space visited by an optimization algorithm. If t iterations of gradient descent visit p oints θ (1) , . . . , θ ( t ) , then the output of the P oly ak av eraging algorithm is ˆ θ ( t ) = 1 t  i θ ( i ) . On some problem classes, suc h as gradien t descen t applied to con v ex problems, this approac h has strong conv ergence guaran tees. When applied to neural net w orks, its justiﬁcation is more heuristic, but it p erforms w ell in practice. The basic idea is that the optimization algorithm ma y leap back and forth across a v alley several times without ever visiting a p oin t near the b ottom of the v alley . The av erage of all the lo cations on either side should b e close to the b ottom of the v alley though. In nonconv ex problems, the path taken b y the optimization tra jectory can b e v ery complicated and visit man y diﬀerent regions. Including p oints in parameter space from the distant past that may b e separated from the current p oin t b y large barriers in the cost function do es not seem like a useful b ehavi or. As a result, when applying P oly ak av eraging to noncon v ex problems, it is typical to use an exp onen tially decaying running av erage: ˆ θ ( t ) = α ˆ θ ( t − 1) + (1 − α ) θ ( t ) . (8.39) The running a v erage approach is used in numerous applications. See Szegedy et al. ( 2015 ) for a recent example. 318 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS 8.7.4 Sup ervised Pretraining Sometimes, directly training a mo del to solve a sp eciﬁc task can b e to o ambitious if the mo del is complex and hard to optimize or if the task is very diﬃcult. It is sometimes more eﬀectiv e to train a simpler mo del to solve the task, then make the mo del more complex. It can also b e more eﬀective to train the mo del to solve a simpler task, then mov e on to confront the ﬁnal task. These strategies that in v olv e training simple mo dels on simple tasks b efore confronting the c hallenge of training the desired mo del to p erform the desired task are collectively known as pretraining . Greedy algorithms break a problem in to many comp onents, then solve for the optimal v ersion of each comp onen t in isolation. Unfortunately , combining the individually optimal comp onents is not guaran teed to yield an optimal complete solution. Nonetheless, greedy algorithms can b e computationally muc h cheaper than algorithms that solve for the b est joint solution, and the quality of a greedy solution is often acceptable if not optimal. Greedy algorithms may also b e follow ed b y a ﬁne-tuning stage in which a joint optimization algorithm searc hes for an optimal solution to the full problem. Initializing the join t optimization algorithm with a greedy solution can greatly sp eed it up and impro ve the qualit y of the solution it ﬁnds. Pretraining, and especially greedy pretraining, algorithms are ubiquitous in deep learning. In this section, w e describ e sp eciﬁcally those pretraining algorithms that break sup ervised learning problems in to other simpler sup ervised learning problems. This approach is known as greedy sup ervised pretraining . In the original ( Bengio et al. , 2007 ) version of greedy sup ervised pretraining, eac h stage consists of a sup ervised learning training task inv olving only a subset of the lay ers in the ﬁnal neural net w ork. An example of greedy sup ervised pretraining is illustrated in ﬁgure 8.7 , in which eac h added hidden lay er is pretrained as part of a shallow sup ervised MLP , taking as input the output of the previously trained hidden lay er. Instead of pretraining one lay er at a time, Simony an and Zisserman ( 2015 ) pretrain a deep conv olutional netw ork (eleven weigh t lay ers) and then use the ﬁrst four and last three la yers from this netw ork to initialize even deep er net w orks (with up to nineteen la yers of weigh ts). The middle lay ers of the new, v ery deep netw ork are initialized randomly . The new net w ork is then jointly trained. Another option, explored by Y u et al. ( 2010 ), is to use the outputs of the previously trained MLPs, as well as the raw input, as inputs for each added stage. Wh y w ould greedy sup ervised pretraining help? The hypothesis initially discussed by Bengio et al. ( 2007 ) is that it helps to pro vide b etter guidance to the 319 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS y y h (1) h (1) x x (a) U (1) U (1) W (1) W (1) y y h (1) h (1) x x (b) U (1) U (1) W (1) W (1) y y h (1) h (1) x x (c) U (1) U (1) W (1) W (1) h (2) h (2) y y U (2) U (2) W (2) W (2) y y h (1) h (1) x x (d) U (1) U (1) W (1) W (1) h (2) h (2) y U (2) U (2) W (2) W (2) Figure 8.7: Illustration of one form of greedy sup ervised pretraining ( Bengio et al. , 2007 ). (a) W e start b y training a suﬃciently shallow architecture. (b) Another dra wing of the same architecture. (c) W e k eep only the input-to-hidden lay er of the original netw ork and discard the hidden-to-output la y er. W e send the output of the ﬁrst hidden la yer as input to another supervised single hidden la yer MLP that is trained with the same ob jectiv e as the ﬁrst netw ork was, thus adding a second hidden lay er. This can b e rep eated for as man y lay ers as desired. (d) Another drawing of the result, viewed as a feedforward netw ork. T o further improv e the optimization, we can jointly ﬁne-tune all the la yers, either only at the end or at eac h stage of this pro cess. 320 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS in termediate levels of a deep hierarc h y . In general, pretraining may help b oth in terms of optimization and generalization. An approach related to sup ervised pretraining extends the idea to the context of transfer learning: Y osinski et al. ( 2014 ) pretrain a deep con v olutional net with eigh t lay ers of w eigh ts on a set of tasks (a subset of the 1,000 ImageNet ob ject categories) and then initialize a same-size netw ork with the ﬁrst k la y ers of the ﬁrst net. All the la yers of the second netw ork (with the upp er lay ers initialized randomly) are then join tly trained to p erform a diﬀeren t set of tasks (another subset of the 1,000 ImageNet ob ject categories), with few er training examples than for the ﬁrst set of tasks. Other approac hes to transfer learning with neural net w orks are discussed in section 15.2 . Another related line of work is the FitNets ( Romero et al. , 2015 ) approach. This approach b egins by training a netw ork that has low enough depth and great enough width (n um b er of units p er la y er) to b e easy to train. This net w ork then b ecomes a teac her for a second netw ork, designated the studen t . The studen t net w ork is muc h deep er and thinner (elev en to nineteen lay ers) and w ould b e diﬃcult to train with SGD under normal circumstances. The training of the studen t net w ork is made easier by training the student netw ork not only to predict the output for the original task, but also to predict the v alue of the middle la y er of the teacher netw ork. This extra task provides a set of hints ab out ho w the hidden la y ers should b e used and can simplify the optimization problem. A dditional parameters are introduced to regress the middle la y er of the ﬁve la y er teac her net w ork from the middle la y er of the deep er student netw ork. Instead of predicting the ﬁnal classiﬁcation target, ho w ev er, the ob jectiv e is to predict the middle hidden la y er of the teacher net w ork. The lo w er lay ers of the studen t netw orks th us hav e t w o ob jectiv es: to help the outputs of the student net w ork accomplish their task, as well as to predict the in termediate la y er of the teac her netw ork. Although a thin and deep netw ork app ears to b e more diﬃcult to train than a wide and shallow net w ork, the thin and deep netw ork may generalize b etter and certainly has low er computational cost if it is thin enough to ha v e far fewer parameters. Without the hints on the hidden lay er, the student netw ork p erforms v ery p o orly in the exp erimen ts, on b oth the training and the test set. Hin ts on middle lay ers may th us b e one of the to ols to help train neural net works that otherwise seem diﬃcult to train, but other optimization techniques or changes in the architecture may also solv e the problem. 321 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS 8.7.5 Designing Mo dels to Aid Optimization T o improv e optimization, the b est strategy is not alwa ys to improv e the optimization algorithm. Instead, many improv ements in the optimization of deep mo dels hav e come from designing the mo dels to b e easier to optimize. In principle, w e could use activ ation functions that increase and decrease in jagged nonmonotonic patterns, but this w ould make optimization extremely diﬃcult. In practice, it is mor e imp ortant to cho ose a mo del family that is e asy to optimize than to use a p owerful optimization algorithm . Most of the adv ances in neural netw ork learning ov er the past thirty y ears hav e b een obtained by changing the mo del family rather than changing the optimization pro cedure. Sto chastic gradien t descent with momentum, which w as used to train neural netw orks in the 1980s, remains in use in mo dern state-of-the-art neural net w ork applications. Sp eciﬁcally , mo dern neural net w orks reﬂect a design choic e to use linear trans- formations b etw een la y ers and activ ation functions that are diﬀerentiable almost ev erywhere, with signiﬁcant slop e in large p ortions of their domain. In particular, mo del innov ations lik e the LSTM, rectiﬁed linear units and maxout units hav e all mov ed to ward using more linear functions than previous mo dels like deep net w orks based on sigmoidal units. These mo dels hav e nice prop erties that make optimization easier. The gradient ﬂows through many la y ers provided that the Jacobian of the linear transformation has reasonable singular v alues. Moreo ver, linear functions consistently increase in a single direction, so even if the mo del’s output is v ery far from correct, it is clear simply from computing the gradien t whic h direction its output should mov e to reduce the loss function. In other w ords, mo dern neural nets hav e been designed so that their lo c al gradient information corresp onds reasonably w ell to mo ving tow ard a distant solution. Other model design strategies can help to make optimization easier. F or example, linear paths or skip connections b et w een lay ers reduce the length of the shortest path from the lo wer la yer’s parameters to the output, and th us mitigate the v anishing gradient problem ( Sriv astav a et al. , 2015 ). A related idea to skip connections is adding extra copies of the output that are attached to the in termediate hidden la y ers of the net w ork, as in Go ogLeNet ( Szegedy et al. , 2014a ) and deeply sup ervised nets ( Lee et al. , 2014 ). These “auxiliary heads” are trained to p erform the same task as the primary output at the top of the net w ork to ensure that the low er la y ers receive a large gradient. When training is complete, the auxiliary heads may b e discarded. This is an alternative to the pretraining strategies, whic h were introduced in the previous section. In this wa y , one can train jointly all the lay ers in a single phase but change the arc hitecture, so that in termediate lay ers (esp ecially the low er ones) can get some hints ab out what they 322 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS should do, via a shorter path. These hin ts provide an error signal to lo w er lay ers. 8.7.6 Con tin uation Metho ds and Curriculum Learnin g As argued in section 8.2.7 , man y of the c hallenges in optimization arise from the global structure of the cost function and cannot b e resolved merely by making b etter estimates of lo cal up date directions. The predominan t strategy for ov ercoming this problem is to attempt to initialize the parameters in a region connected to the solution by a short path through parameter space that lo cal descent can discov er. Con tin uation metho ds are a family of strategies that can mak e optimization easier by c ho osing initial p oints to ensure that lo cal optimization sp ends most of its time in w ell-b eha v ed regions of space. The idea b ehind contin uation metho ds is to construct a series of ob jectiv e functions ov er the same parameters. T o minimize a cost function J ( θ ) , we construct new cost functions { J (0) , . . . , J ( n ) } . These cost functions are designed to b e increasingly diﬃcult, with J (0) b eing fairly easy to minimize, and J ( n ) , the most diﬃcult, b eing J ( θ ) , the true cost function motiv ating the entire process. When we sa y that J ( i ) is easier than J ( i +1) , we mean that it is well b eha v ed ov er more of θ space. A random initialization is more lik ely to land in the region where lo cal descent can minimize the cost function successfully b ecause this region is larger. The series of cost functions are designed so that a solution to one is a go o d initial p oint of the next. W e thus b egin b y solving an easy problem, then reﬁne the solution to solve incrementally harder problems until w e arrive at a solution to the true underlying problem. T raditional contin uation metho ds (predating the use of contin uation metho ds for neural net w ork training) are usually based on smo othing the ob jective function. See W u ( 1997 ) for an example of suc h a metho d and a review of some related metho ds. Contin uation metho ds are also closely related to sim ulated annealing, whic h adds noise to the parameters ( Kirkpatrick et al. , 1983 ). Con tinuation metho ds hav e b een extremely successful in recen t years. See Mobahi and Fisher ( 2015 ) for an ov erview of recent literature, esp ecially for AI applications. Con tin uation metho ds traditionally were mostly designed with the goal of o v ercoming the challenge of lo cal minima. Sp eciﬁcally , they were designed to reac h a global minim um despite the presence of many lo cal minima. T o do so, these contin uation metho ds w ould construct easier cost functions by “blurring” the original cost function. This blurring op eration can b e done by appro ximating J ( i ) ( θ ) = E θ  ∼N ( θ  ; θ ,σ ( i )2 ) J ( θ  ) (8.40) via sampling. The intuition for this approach is that some noncon v ex functions b ecome approximately conv ex when blurred. In many cases, this blurring preserves 323 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS enough information ab out the lo cation of a global minimum that we can ﬁnd the global minim um by solving progressively less-blurred v ersions of the problem. This approac h can break down in three diﬀerent wa ys. First, it might successfully deﬁne a series of cost functions where the ﬁrst is con v ex and the optimum trac ks from one function to the next, arriving at the global minim um, but it might require so man y incremental cost functions that the cost of the entire pro cedure remains high. NP-hard optimization problems remain NP-hard, even when contin uation metho ds are applicable. The other tw o wa ys con tin uation metho ds fail b oth corresp ond to the metho d not b eing applicable. First, the function might not b ecome con v ex, no matter how muc h it is blurred. Consider, for example, the function J ( θ ) = − θ  θ . Second, the function may b ecome con v ex as a result of blurring, but the minim um of this blurred function may trac k to a lo cal rather than a global minimum of the original cost function. Though contin uation metho ds were mostly originally designed to deal with the problem of lo cal minima, lo cal minima are no longer b elieved to b e the primary problem for neural netw ork optimization. F ortunately , contin uation metho ds can still help. The easier ob jectiv e functions introduced b y the contin uation metho d can eliminate ﬂat regions, decrease v ariance in gradien t estimates, impro v e conditioning of the Hessian matrix, or do anything else that will either make local up dates easier to compute or improv e the corresp ondence b et w een lo cal up date directions and progress to w ard a global solution. Bengio et al. ( 2009 ) observed that an approac h called curriculum learning , or shaping , can b e interpreted as a contin uation metho d. Curriculum learning is based on the idea of planning a learning process to b egin b y learning simple concepts and progress to learning more complex concepts that dep end on these simpler concepts. This basic strategy was previously known to accelerate progress in animal training ( Skinner , 1958 ; P eterson , 2004 ; Krueger and Day an , 2009 ) and in machine learning ( Solomonoﬀ , 1989 ; Elman , 1993 ; Sanger , 1994 ). Bengio et al. ( 2009 ) justiﬁed this strategy as a contin uation metho d, where earlier J ( i ) are made easier b y increasing the inﬂuence of simpler examples (either by assigning their contributions to the cost function larger co eﬃcients, or by sampling them more frequently), and exp erimen tally demonstrated that b etter results could b e obtained by following a curriculum on a large-scale neural language mo deling task. Curriculum learning has b een successful on a wide range of natural language ( Spitk o vsky et al. , 2010 ; Collob ert et al. , 2011a ; Mikolo v et al. , 2011b ; T u and Honav ar , 2011 ) and computer vision ( Kumar et al. , 2010 ; Lee and Grauman , 2011 ; Supancic and Ramanan , 2013 ) tasks. Curriculum learning w as also veriﬁed as b eing consistent with the w ay in whic h humans te ach ( Khan et al. , 2011 ): teac hers start b y showing easier and more prototypical examples and then help the learner reﬁne the decision surface 324 CHAPTER 8. OPTIMIZA TION FOR TRAINING DEEP MODELS with the less obvious cases. Curriculum-based strategies are mor e eﬀe ctive for teac hing humans than strategies based on uniform sampling of examples and can also increase the eﬀectiveness of other teac hing strategies ( Basu and Christensen , 2013 ). Another imp ortant contribution to research on curriculum learning arose in the con text of training recurren t neural netw orks to capture long-term dep endencies: Zarem ba and Sutsk ev er ( 2014 ) found that muc h b etter results were obtained with a sto chastic curriculum , in which a random mix of easy and diﬃcult examples is alwa ys presen ted to the learner, but where the av erage prop ortion of the more diﬃcult examples (here, those with longer-term dep endencies) is gradually increased. With a deterministic curriculum, no impro v ement ov er the baseline (ordinary training from the full training set) was observ ed. W e hav e no w describ ed the basic family of neural net w ork mo dels and ho w to regularize and optimize them. In the c hapters ahead, we turn to sp ecializations of the neural netw ork family that allow neural net w orks to scale to v ery large sizes and pro cess input data that has sp ecial structure. The optimization metho ds discussed in this chapter are often directly applicable to these sp ecialized arc hitectures with little or no mo diﬁcation. 325 